## Animal virus replication and RNAi-mediated antiviral silencing in Caenorhabditis elegans

R. Lu<sup>1</sup> \*, M. Maduro<sup>2</sup> \*, F. Li1,3, H. W. Li<sup>1</sup> , G. Broitman-Maduro<sup>2</sup> , W. X. Li<sup>1</sup> & S. W. Ding1,3

The worm Caenorhabditis elegans is a model system for studying many aspects of biology, including host responses to bacterial pathogens1,2, but it is not known to support replication of any virus. Plants and insects encode multiple Dicer enzymes that recognize distinct precursors of small RNAs and may act cooperatively3–7. However, it is not known whether the single Dicer of worms and mammals is able to initiate the small RNA-guided RNA interference (RNAi) antiviral immunity as occurs in plants<sup>8</sup> and insects<sup>9</sup> . Here we show complete replication of the Flock house virus (FHV) bipartite, plus-strand RNA genome in C. elegans. We show that FHV replication in C. elegans triggers potent antiviral silencing that requires RDE-1, an Argonaute protein10,11 essential for RNAi mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) but not by microRNAs. This immunity system is capable of rapid virus clearance in the absence of FHV B2 protein, which acts as a broad-spectrum RNAi inhibitor9,12 upstream of rde-1 by targeting the siRNA precursor. This work establishes a C. elegans model for genetic studies of animal virus–host interactions and indicates that mammals might use a siRNA pathway as an antiviral response.

We chose animal nodavirus FHV to determine whether C. elegans supports virus replication, because FHV replicates in yeast, plant, insect and mammalian cells13. The first genome segment of FHV, RNA1, encodes the entire viral contribution to the viral RNAdependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) and replicates autonomously in the absence of RNA2, which depends on RNA1 for replication13 (Fig. 1a). Worm strains were generated to carry either a chromosomally integrated FR1 (for FHV RNA1) or FR2 (for FHV RNA2) transgene, designed to yield transcripts in the soma after heat induction that are identical in sequence to FHV genomic RNAs 1 and 2, respectively (Fig. 1b). Northern blot hybridizations detected a high-level accumulation of FHV RNA1 in worms carrying the FR1-3 transgene after transcription induction (Fig. 1c, lane 3). FHV RNA2 accumulated to high levels in strain FR1-3/FR2 carrying both FR1-3 and FR2 combined by genetic crosses (Fig. 1c, lane 5) but was undetectable in worms carrying FR2 alone (Fig. 1c, lane 6). Thus, the abundant viral RNAs detected in transgenic worm strains resulted from active RNA replication, because in the absence of RNA replication the initial heat-inducible transcripts were below the limit of detection in FR2 worms two days after induction.

Both FR1-3 and FR1-3/FR2 worms also contained abundant RNA3 (Fig. 1c, lanes 3 and 5). RNA3 is a subgenomic RNA transcribed during RNA1 replication from an internal site of the complementary, replicative intermediate of RNA1, (2)-RNA1 (Fig. 1a), and is not required in the initiation of FHV infection unlike the genomic RNAs. RNA1 replication initiated from FR1-2 transcripts was inefficient and became detectable only in the presence of RNA2 replication (Fig. 1c, lanes 2 and 4), which directs the expression of the pre-capsid protein (pre-CP) essential for virion packaging (Fig. 1a). Taken together, the detection of self-replication of RNA1 and trans replication of RNA2 as well as the production of a subgenomic RNA in these worm strains provide evidence that C. elegans supports complete replication of the FHV RNA genome.

To investigate a possible induction of antiviral silencing by FHV RNA replication in worms, we first examined whether FHV accumulation in C. elegans requires expression of the FHV-encoded B2 protein, an RNAi suppressor that is active across the animal and plant kingdoms9,12 and is not known to have a direct role in FHV RNA replication13. We created a derivative of the FR1-3 transgene, FR1- 3DB2 (Fig. 1b), containing a point mutation that abolished the B2 open reading frame but had no effect on the out-of-frame overlapping viral RdRP open reading frame (Fig. 1b). In contrast to high levels of RNA1 and RNA3 in FR1-3 worms (Fig. 1c, lane 3), we

Figure 1 | Replication and silencing of FHV in C. elegans. a, Structure, replication and expression of FHV genome. b, Structure of FHV transgenes. HIP, heat inducible promoter. The junction region between HIP (lower-case letters) and FHV cDNA (capital letters) is shown. Transcriptional initiation sites from HIP were indicated. Rz is a self-cleaving ribozyme used to reduce non-viral extensions at the 3<sup>0</sup> termini of heat-induced transcripts. c, d, Northern blot detection of FHV RNA accumulation in C. elegans (c) and fruitfly S2 cells (d). Each lane in c and d was loaded with 4 mg of total RNA, except for lane 8 of c. WT, wild-type.

1 Institute for Integrative Genome Biology and Department of Plant Pathology, <sup>2</sup> Department of Biology, and <sup>3</sup> Graduate Program for Microbiology, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, USA.

\*These authors contributed equally to this work.

detected no accumulation of FHV RNA1 in worms carrying an integrated FR1-3DB2 transgene (Fig. 1c, lane 7). Thus, B2 is also essential for FHV accumulation in C. elegans as has been shown in cultured insect cells9,12.

If the lack of FHV RNA accumulation in FR1-3DB2 worms was indeed due to a loss of B2 suppression of RNAi, we would expect to find FR1-3DB2 accumulation rescued in worm mutants defective in support of RNAi. To test this hypothesis, worm strains carrying FR1- 3 and FR1-3DB2 were each crossed into an rde-1 (ne219) mutant background10. Unlike many RNAi mutants such as dcr-1/Dicer, which exhibit multiple developmental defects due to the disruption of microRNA (miRNA) function<sup>6</sup> , rde-1 mutants are otherwise very healthy10. Northern blot analysis revealed that, whereas FHV RNA1 was undetectable in wild-type N2 worms carrying FR1-3DB2 (Fig. 1c, lane 7), the same FR1-3DB2 transgene directed abundant accumulation of FHV RNAs 1 and 3 in the rde-1 mutant background (Fig. 1c, lane 8). In fact, the accumulation level of FHV RNAs in FR1-3DB2/ rde-1 worms was similar to that in FR1-3 worms (Fig. 1c, compare lanes 3 and 8; note that the amount of total RNAs loaded in lane 8 was about one-third of that loaded in lane 3; see also Fig. 2). Thus, the mutant RNA1 from the FR1-3DB2 transgene is not defective in selfdirected replication, indicating that the reduced accumulation of viral RNA in FR1-3DB2/N2 worms (Fig. 1c, lane 7) was due to the induction and clearance of viral RNAs by antiviral silencing in an rde-1-dependent siRNA pathway.

Both FHV RNAs 1 and 2 produced in worms were biologically active after transfection into cultured Drosophila S2 cells (Fig. 1d, lanes 3–5), which are known to initiate potent RNAi-mediated antiviral silencing after challenge with FHV<sup>9</sup> . In contrast, no viral RNA was detected in S2 cells transfected with total RNA extracted from either FR1-3DB2/N2 or FR1-3DB2/rde-1 worms (Fig. 1d, lanes 7 and 8), in spite of the fact that the total RNA sample extracted from FR1-3DB2/rde-1 worms contained abundant FHV RNA1 (Fig. 1c, lane 8). This finding shows that progeny RNA1 of FR1-3DB2 produced in FR1-3DB2/rde-1 worms remained defective in B2 expression and incapable of preventing virus clearance by RNAimediated antiviral silencing in S2 cells<sup>9</sup> . We therefore conclude that abundant accumulation of FHV RNAs detected in FR1-3DB2/rde-1 worms does not result from a genetic reversion in the progeny of FR1-3DB2 but is due to the genetic suppression of viral B2 deletion by the loss-of-function mutation of rde-1 in the worm genome. This genetic complementation of loss-of-function mutations in a viral RNAi suppressor gene and a host RNAi pathway gene provides the first direct evidence that viral RNAi suppressors enhance virus accumulation and facilitate viral infection by suppressing the host antiviral silencing mechanism.

Comparative analysis of the viral RNA accumulation among FR1-

Figure 2 | FHV RNAi suppressor is active in rde-1 worms. Total RNA was extracted from worms of either wild-type (WT) or rde-1 genotype carrying an integrated FR1-3 or FR1-3DB2 transgene, two days after transcriptional induction. Northern blot hybridizations were performed as in Fig. 1c, d.

3/rde-1, FR1-3/N2 and FR1-3DB2/rde-1 worms reveals two interesting results. First, the accumulation of FHV RNA1 derived from the same FR1-3 transgene array was much lower in N2 worms than in rde-1 worms (Fig. 2, compare lanes 3 and 4 with lanes 5 and 6). This difference could be due to an incomplete B2 suppression of the worm rde-1-dependent antiviral silencing in FR1-3 worms, or alternatively it might result from the recently discovered, rde-1-dependent transcriptional transgene silencing in the soma14. Second, FHV RNA1 accumulated to much higher levels in FR1-3/rde-1 worms than in FR1-3DB2/rde-1 worms (Fig. 2, compare lanes 5 and 6 with lanes 9 and 10), indicating that B2 expression also enhances viral accumulation in absence of rde-1. Because B2 is a broad-spectrum RNAi suppressor active in both the animal and plant kingdoms9,12 but does not influence the rate of FHV RNA replication13, our data indicate the possible presence of active antiviral RNAi in rde-1 worms, which might be mediated by one or more of the remaining 26 worm Argonaute (AGO) genes, among which differential requirements for alg-1, alg-2, ppw-1 and ppw-2 in various RNAi processes have been documented15.

Our genetic analysis indicates that the viral RNAi suppressor is active in both wild-type and rde-1 worms, indicating that B2 might act upstream of AGO. AGO has a key function in the RNA-induced silencing complex by binding to siRNA for recognition and cleavage of the mRNA target6,11. No known protein domain was recognizable in the 106-residue FHV B2. We found that B2 synthesized as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion was able to bind in vitro to a 21-nucleotide (nt) siRNA duplex (Fig. 3a, lanes 1–6) independently of its overhang nucleotides (data not shown); siRNA binding has been reported for p19, a silencing suppressor encoded by the plant tombusvirus16. However, unlike p19, which binds much more weakly to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) longer than 23 nt, B2 also bound 25-nt siRNA and dsRNA 44 nt (Fig. 3d) and 100 nt (data not shown) in length. Furthermore, competition experiments indicated a much higher affinity of B2 for long dsRNA than for siRNA duplexes because the 100-nt dsRNA was approximately 30-fold more effective than 21-nt siRNA in inhibiting the formation of the siRNA–B2 complex (Fig. 3a, c).

A mutational analysis identified the replacement of Arg by Gln at position 54 (R54Q) of B2, which, when introduced into FHV RNA1, led to at least a 20-fold reduction in the accumulation of FHV RNAs in comparison with wild-type FHV RNA1 (data not shown). The same R54Q mutation completely abolished the B2 activity to bind long dsRNA (Fig. 3d, lanes 8–19). The effect of the R54Q mutation on siRNA binding was less marked: whereas the upper migrating siRNA–B2 complexes disappeared, the faster-migrating siRNA–B2 complexes remained visible (Fig. 3b, compare lanes 1, 2, 5 and 6 with lanes 3, 4, 7 and 8). Furthermore, we found that Dicer processing of a labelled 500-nt dsRNA into siRNAs was inhibited by FHV B2 fused with GST beginning at 800 nM (Fig. 3e, lane 9) but not by GST up to 10,000 nM (Fig. 3e, lane 6), and that the inhibitory effect was essentially eliminated by the R54Q mutation (data not shown). These findings indicate a new mechanism of viral suppression of antiviral silencing by targeting the dsRNA precursor of siRNAs, although they do not rule out a possible role of siRNA binding16–18. This model is consistent with the genetic analysis placing B2 upstream of AGO and explains why B2 is active in both the animal and plant kingdoms.

Endogenous mammalian gene silencing by miRNAs starts in the nucleus with the cleavage by Drosha of primary miRNA transcripts into precursor miRNAs, which are then exported to the cytoplasm, where they are further processed into mature miRNAs by Dicer6 . Much less is known about the initiation of antiviral RNA silencing in any organism. For RNA viruses, present models consider both dsRNA produced during RNA replication and highly structured elements in single-stranded viral RNAs as potential initiators by means of the siRNA and miRNA pathways, respectively16,18,19. Our genetic analyses (ref. 9 and this study) indicate a possibly more prominent role for the siRNA pathway in the recognition of the viral silencing initiators because neither Drosophila AGO2 nor C. elegans RDE-1 is essential for miRNA function20, in spite of their requirement in antiviral silencing. Furthermore, with a few exceptions such as influenza viruses12, and unlike DNA viruses21, most RNA viruses replicate exclusively in the cytoplasm and may escape detection by the miRNA pathway initiating in the nucleus. Nevertheless, potent antiviral silencing detected in a single Dicer organism rules out an essential role for multiple Dicers found in plants and insects3–7, indicating an antiviral potential for the mammalian RNAi machinery through the siRNA pathway in addition to targeting viral mRNAs by cellular miRNAs22. The C. elegans model established in this work will facilitate genetic studies of animal virus–host interactions, many aspects of which cannot be addressed in the alternative model in Saccharomyces cerevisiae23, a unicellular organism that does not seem to encode an RNAi pathway<sup>6</sup> . Although most nodaviruses are pathogens of insect and fish hosts, Nodamura virus<sup>12</sup> infects and

## Figure 3 | FHV B2 is a dsRNA-binding protein and inhibits siRNA

production in vitro. a–d, GST-tagged B2 protein (GST-B2) binds both 21-nt siRNA duplex (a and b) and 44-nt dsRNA (d) in vitro. Volumes of the top siRNA–B2 band in lanes 7–10 and 15–18 of a were quantified by phosphorimaging and plotted against the concentrations of the unlabelled competitor RNAs (c); dotted line, 100-nt dsRNA as unlabelled competitor; solid line, 21-nt siRNA as unlabelled competitor. Note the presence of nonspecific signals in lanes 1, 8, 13 and 16 of d. The final concentration for all labelled RNAs was 50 nM whereas 4 different concentrations (50, 100, 500 and 5,000 nM) were used for each unlabelled competitor RNA (lanes 7–18 of a). The concentrations of GST-B2 or GST fused with the mutant B2 (GSTmB2) ranged from 0 to 40 ng ml <sup>2</sup><sup>1</sup> in all RNA binding assays as indicated at the top of each lane, except for lanes 7–18 of a where GST-B2 was constant at 40 ng ml 21 . e, B2 inhibits in vitro processing of a labelled long dsRNA by the Dicer extracts from fruitfly S2 cells. Concentration gradients of GSTor GST-B2 used were 50, 200, 800, 3,200 and 10,000 nM. The labelled dsRNA was incubated in buffer without Dicer extract (lane 2). A labelled 21-nt siRNA was used as a marker (M) at the left.

kills sucking mice and sucking hamsters13, indicating a potential of the worm model for studying the pathogenesis of mammalian viral diseases.

## METHODS

Transgene constructs and transgenic worms. Constructs were generated by standard methods by using the vector pPD49.83 (a gift from A. Fire) which contains the promoter of the hsp16-41 gene24. Full-length cDNAs to FHV RNA1 and RNA2 together with a self-cleaving ribozyme from the tobacco ringspot virus satellite RNA were obtained from the infectious FHV cDNA clones previously constructed for infection of Drosophila S2 cells9 .

Nematodes were propagated and maintained by standard protocols<sup>1</sup> . The following strains were used: N2 (wild type), unc-119(ed4) III and rde-1(ne219) V. Animals were made transgenic by gonadal microinjection25. FHV plasmids were mixed with either the rol-6 <sup>D</sup> plasmid pRF4 for injection into wild-type animals25, or the unc-119(þ) plasmid pDP#MM016B for injection into unc-119 mutants26. Integrated lines were generated by treating about 30 transgenic hermaphrodites with 3,500 rad of g-rays from a 137Cs source, followed by screening for integrated animals in the F2 generation.

rol-6 <sup>D</sup> and unc-119(þ) transgenes were combined as described26. To generate rde-1;rol-6<sup>D</sup> strains, rde-1(ne219) males were crossed with rol-6<sup>D</sup> transgene hermaphrodites. F2 animals were grown individually on Escherichia coli HT115 expressing unc-22 dsRNA (ref. 27), and plates generating no Unc-22 animals were assumed to be homozygous for rde-1(ne219).

Assay for FHV replication in C. elegans. Expression of FHV transgenes was achieved for each strain as follows. First, ten young adult hermaphrodites were placed on a seeded 10-cm plate and allowed to grow to the next generation for 5 days at 20 8C. Plates were incubated for 2 h at 33 8C and returned to 23 8C for two days, after which they were washed off plates into water and stored at 280 8C. Total RNA was obtained by homogenizing thawed worm pellets with a Tissue Tearor (BioSpec Products) followed by extraction with TRIzol (Invitrogen), then a column-based RNA purification with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. RNA concentrations were normalized and used for northern blot analysis in accordance with standard protocols<sup>9</sup> with a 32P-labelled cDNA probe that corresponded either to FHV RNA2 or to the last 387 nt of FHV RNA1, thus hybridizing to both RNAs 1 and 3.

To verify the biological activities of FHV RNAs produced in C. elegans, cultured Drosophila S2 cells were transfected with 2 mg of total RNA extracted from individual worm strains two days after heat induction. Three days after transfection, total RNAwas extracted from S2 cells for northern blot detection of FHV RNA accumulation. pMT-FR1 was used as a control and contained the fulllength cDNA of FHV RNA1 under the transcriptional control of the CuSO4 inducible metallothionein promoter as described9 .

Fusion protein expression, dsRNA binding and Dicer activity assays. Expression of GST-tagged B2 proteins (GST-B2) in E. coli and RNA binding assays were performed as described previously12,28. Both single-stranded and duplex siRNAs were synthesized chemically and end-labelled by exchange reaction. Long dsRNA (44 nt and 100 nt) was transcribed and annealed in vitro, either with or without kinase end-labelling after dephosphorylation. The final concentration for all labelled RNAs was 50 nM, whereas four different concentrations (50, 100, 500 and 5,000 nM) were used for each unlabelled competitor RNA. mB2 contained an Arg *!* Gln substitution at position 54 of FHV B2. The concentrations of GST-B2 or GST-mB2 used in RNA binding ranged from 0 to 40 ng ml <sup>2</sup><sup>1</sup> as indicated. Binding reactions were resolved by native 6% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) for binding to the 44-nt dsRNA or 8% for siRNA binding. Gels were dried before autoradiography.

Preparation of Dicer extracts from Drosophila S2 cells, labelling of long dsRNA, and the Dicer activity assay were as described7 . A 32P-labelled 500-nt dsRNA at 7.5 nM was incubated with the Dicer extracts in the presence of either GST or GST-B2 in five different concentrations, namely 50, 200, 800, 3,200 and 10,000 nM. After incubation, RNAs were fractionated by 15% PAGE along with a chemically synthesized 21-nt siRNA labelled with [g-32P]ATP as a marker.

## Received 4 January; accepted 6 June 2005.

- 1. Brenner, S. The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77, 71–-94 (1974).
- 2. Mahajan-Miklos, S., Tan, M. W., Rahme, L. G. & Ausubel, F. M. Molecular mechanisms of bacterial virulence elucidated using a Pseudomonas aeruginosa–- Caenorhabditis elegans pathogenesis model. Cell 96, 47–-56 (1999).
- 3. Fire, A. et al. Potent and specific genetic interference by double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 391, 806–-811 (1998).
- 4. Xie, Z. et al. Genetic and functional diversification of small RNA pathways in plants. PLoS Biol. 2, 642–-652 (2004).
- 5. Lee, Y. S. et al. Distinct roles for Drosophila Dicer-1 and Dicer-2 in the siRNA/ miRNA silencing pathways. Cell 117, 69–-81 (2004).
- 7. Bernstein, E., Caudy, A. A., Hammond, S. M. & Hannon, G. J. Role for a bidentate ribonuclease in the initiation step of RNA interference. Nature 409, 363–-366 (2001).
- 8. Hamilton, A. J. & Baulcombe, D. C. A species of small antisense RNA in posttranscriptional gene silencing in plants. Science 286, 950–-952 (1999).
- 9. Li, H. W., Li, W. X. & Ding, S. W. Induction and suppression of RNA silencing by an animal virus. Science 296, 1319–-1321 (2002).
- 10. Tabara, H. et al. The rde-1 gene, RNA interference, and transposon silencing in C. elegans. Cell 99, 123–-132 (1999).
- 11. Hammond, S. M., Boettcher, S., Caudy, A. A., Kobayashi, R. & Hannon, G. J. Argonaute2, a link between genetic and biochemical analyses of RNAi. Science 293, 1146–-1150 (2001).
- 12. Li, W. X. et al. Interferon antagonist proteins of influenza and vaccinia viruses are suppressors of RNA silencing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 1350–-1355 (2004).
- 13. Ball, L. A. & Johnson, K. L. Reverse genetics of nodaviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 53, 229–-244 (1999).
- 14. Grishok, A., Sinskey, J. L. & Sharp, P. A. Transcriptional silencing of a transgene by RNAi in the soma of C. elegans. Genes Dev. 19, 683–-696 (2005).
- 15. Vastenhouw, N. L. & Plasterk, R. H. RNAi protects the Caenorhabditis elegans germline against transposition. Trends Genet. 20, 314–-319 (2004).
- 16. Silhavy, D. & Burgyan, J. Effects and side-effects of viral RNA silencing suppressors on short RNAs. Trends Plant Sci. 9, 76–-83 (2004).
- 17. Li, W. X. & Ding, S. W. Viral suppressors of RNA silencing. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 12, 150–-154 (2001).
- 18. Voinnet, O. Induction and suppression of RNA silencing: insights from viral infections. Nature Rev. Genet. 6, 206–-220 (2005).
- 19. Ding, S. W., Li, H., Lu, R., Li, F. & Li, W. X. RNA silencing: a conserved antiviral immunity of plants and animals. Virus Res. 102, 109–-115 (2004).
- 20. Okamura, K., Ishizuka, A., Siomi, H. & Siomi, M. C. Distinct roles for Argonaute proteins in small RNA-directed RNA cleavage pathways. Genes Dev. 18, 1655–-1666 (2004).
- 21. Pfeffer, S. et al. Identification of virus-encoded microRNAs. Science 304, 734–-736 (2004).
- 22. Lecellier, C. H. et al. A cellular microRNA directs antiviral immunity in human cells. Science 308, 557–-560 (2005).
- 23. Lee, W. M. & Ahlquist, P. Membrane synthesis, specific lipid requirements, and localized lipid composition changes associated with a positive-strand RNA virus RNA replication protein. J. Virol. 77, 12819–-12828 (2003).
- 24. Stringham, E. G., Dixon, D. K., Jones, D. & Candido, E. P. Temporal and spatial expression patterns of the small heat shock (hsp16) genes in transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol. Biol. Cell 3, 221–-233 (1992).
- 25. Mello, C. C., Kramer, J. M., Stinchcomb, D. & Ambros, V. Efficient gene transfer in C. elegans: extrachromosomal maintenance and integration of transforming sequences. EMBO J. 10, 3959–-3970 (1991).
- 26. Maduro, M. F., Meneghini, M. D., Bowerman, B., Broitman-Maduro, G. & Rothman, J. H. Restriction of mesendoderm to a single blastomere by the combined action of SKN-1 and a GSK-3b homolog is mediated by MED-1 and - 2 in C. elegans. Mol. Cell 7, 475–-485 (2001).
- 27. Timmons, L., Court, D. L. & Fire, A. Ingestion of bacterially expressed dsRNAs can produce specific and potent genetic interference in Caenorhabditis elegans. Gene 263, 103–-112 (2001).
- 28. Silhavy, D. et al. A viral protein suppresses RNA silencing and binds silencinggenerated, 21- to 25-nucleotide double-stranded RNAs. EMBO J. 21, 3070–-3080 (2002).

Acknowledgements We thank X. Huang for recommending the use of pPD49.83, and the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center funded by the National Center for Research Resources of the National Institutes of Health for some of the strains used in this work. This project was supported by an NIH grant and USDA National Research Initiative Competitive Grants Program awards (to S.W.D.) and UC Riverside startup funds (to M.M).

Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.W.D. (dingsw@ucr.edu).