# **RISC Assembly Defects in the** *Drosophila* **RNAi Mutant** *armitage*

**Yukihide Tomari,1,3 Tingting Du,1,3 Benjamin Haley,1,3 Dianne S. Schwarz,1 Ryan Bennett,1 Heather A. Cook,2 1**

**disrupt anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning. 2002; Doi et al., 2003).**

**lences genes homologous in sequence, a process termed ner and Zamore, 2002). Dicer, too, contains a putative RNA interference (RNAi; Fire et al., 1998). RNAi and other ATP-dependent RNA helicase domain (Bernstein et al., examples of RNA silencing have been observed in ani- 2001). Except for Dicer, no specific biochemical function mals, plants, protozoa, and fungi (Cogoni and Macino, in RNAi has been ascribed to any of these helicase pro-1997; Kennerdell and Carthew, 1998; Ngo et al., 1998; teins. Waterhouse et al., 1998; Lohmann et al., 1999; Sa** *armitage* **(***armi***) was identified in a screen for maternal ´ nchez-Alvarado and Newmark, 1999; Wianny and Zernicka- effect mutants that disrupt axis specification in** *Dro-***Goetz, 2000; Caplen et al., 2001; Elbashir et al., 2001a;** *sophila* **(Cook et al., 2004 [this issue of** *Cell***]). Armitage Volpe et al., 2002; Schramke and Allshire, 2003). In protein (Armi) is a member of a family of putative ATPplants, green algae, and invertebrates, RNAi defends dependent helicases distinct from the DEA(H/D) box the genome against mobile genetic elements, such as proteins (Koonin, 1992). Armi is homologous across its transposons and viruses, whose expression and activity putative helicase domain to SDE3 (Cook et al., 2004), increase in RNAi-defective mutants (Ketting et al., 1999; which is required for PTGS in** *Arabidopsis* **(Dalmay et Ratcliff et al., 1999; Tabara et al., 1999; Dalmay et al., 2000; al., 2001). Because PTGS in plants is mechanistically Mourrain et al., 2000; Wu-Scharf et al., 2000; Aravin et related to RNAi in animals, Armi may play a role in RNAi al., 2001; Sijen and Plasterk, 2003). The RNAi pathway in flies. Here, we show that** *armi* **is required for RNAi. also regulates endogenous gene expression for at least** *armi* **mutant male germ cells fail to silence** *Stellate***, a one** *Drosophila* **gene,** *Stellate* **(***Ste***), which is targeted for gene regulated endogenously by RNAi (Schmidt et al., destruction by dsRNA transcribed from the** *Suppressor-* **1999; Aravin et al., 2001; Stapleton et al., 2001), and**

**Long dsRNA is converted by Dicer, a multidomain ribonuclease III enzyme, into small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) (Zamore et al., 2000; Bernstein et al., 2001; Billy et al., Birgit S. Koppetsch,2 William E. Theurkauf,2,\* 2001), which serve as the specificity determinants of the and Phillip D. Zamore RNAi pathway (Hamilton and Baulcombe, 1999; Ham- 1,\* Department of Biochemistry and Molecular mond et al., 2000; Zamore et al., 2000; Elbashir et al., Pharmacology 2001b). siRNAs direct mRNA cleavage as part of a pro-University of Massachusetts Medical School tein-siRNA complex called the RNA-induced silencing Worcester, Massachusetts 01605 complex (RISC; Hammond et al., 2000, 2001). Members 2Program in Molecular Medicine of the Argonaute family of proteins are core components University of Massachusetts Medical School of RISC or RISC-like complexes in flies (Hammond et Worcester, Massachusetts 01605 al., 2001), worms (Tabara et al., 2002; Hutva´ gner et al., 2004), and humans (Caudy et al., 2002; Hutva´ gner and Zamore, 2002; Martinez et al., 2002; Mourelatos et al., Summary 2002) and are required genetically for RNA silencing in every organism where their function has been studied The putative RNA helicase, Armitage (Armi), is required (Tabara et al., 1999; Fagard et al., 2000; Grishok et al., to repress** *oskar* **translation in** *Drosophila* **oocytes; 2000; Catalanotto et al., 2002; Caudy et al., 2002; Morel** *armi* **mutant females are sterile and** *armi* **mutations et al., 2002; Pal-Bhadra et al., 2002; Williams and Rubin,**

**Here, we show that** *armi* **is required for RNAi.** *armi* **Genetic studies also reveal the importance of helimutant male germ cells fail to silence** *Stellate***, a gene case-domain proteins in the RNAi pathway. Putative regulated endogenously by RNAi, and lysates from DEA(H/D)-box helicases are required for posttranscrip***armi* **mutant ovaries are defective for RNAi in vitro. tional gene silencing (PTGS) in the green alga** *Chlamydo-***Native gel analysis of protein-siRNA complexes in** *monas reinhardtii* **(Wu-Scharf et al., 2000) and RNAi in wild-type and** *armi* **mutant ovary lysates suggests that** *C. elegans* **(Tabara et al., 2002; Tijsterman et al., 2002).** *armi* **mutants support early steps in the RNAi pathway In** *Drosophila***, mutations in** *spindle-E* **(***spn-E***), a gene but are defective in the production of active RNA- encoding a putative DEAD-box helicase, abrogate eninduced silencing complex (RISC), which mediates tar- dogenous RNAi-based repression of the** *Ste* **locus and get RNA destruction in RNAi. Our results suggest that trigger expression of retrotransposon mRNA in the** *armi* **is required for RISC maturation. germline (Aravin et al., 2001; Stapleton et al., 2001). In cultured** *Drosophila* **S2 cells, the putative helicase Introduction Dmp68 is a component of affinity-purified RISC (Ishizuka et al., 2002). Similarly, a putative DEAD-box RNA heli-In eukaryotes, long double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) si- case, Gemin3, is a component of human RISC (Hutva´ g-**

*of-Stellate* **(***Su(Ste)***) locus (Aravin et al., 2001). lysates from** *armi* **mutant ovaries are defective for RNAi in vitro. Native gel analysis of protein-siRNA complexes in wild-type and** *armi* **mutant ovary lysates suggests \*Correspondence: phillip.zamore@umassmed.edu (P.D.Z.) or william. theurkauf@umassmed.edu (W.E.T.) that** *armi* **mutants support early steps in the RNAi path- 3These authors contributed equally to this work. way but are defective in the production of the RISC. Our**

**Figure 1. Armi Is Required for** *Ste* **Silencing in Fly Testes ovaries. The testes from wild-type (A),** *armi1* **(B),** *armi72.1* **(C), and** *armirev39.2*

**of siRNA into functional RISC. firefly luciferase mRNA target with a complementary**

**gous Y-linked** *Su(Ste)* **locus is an example of endoge- 2002; Martinez et al., 2002; Schwarz et al., 2002; Saxena nous RNAi (Aravin et al., 2001; Gvozdev et al., 2003). In et al., 2003). Replacing the 5 hydroxyl of the antisense** *Drosophila* **testes, symmetrical transcription of** *Su(Ste)* **siRNA strand with a 5 methoxy group completely produces dsRNA, which is processed into siRNAs blocked RNAi in the ovary lysate (Figure 2A). In** *Drosoph-* **(Gvozdev et al., 2003).** *Su(Ste)* **siRNAs direct the degra-** *ila***, siRNAs bearing a single 2-deoxy nucleotide at the dation of** *Ste* **mRNA (Aravin et al., 2001). Inappropriate 5 end are poor substrates for the kinase that phosphorexpression of Ste protein in testes is diagnostic of dis- ylates 5 hydroxy siRNAs (Nyka¨ nen et al., 2001). A comruption of the RNAi pathway. Both the Argonaute pro- parison of initial cleavage rates shows that in ovary tein,** *aub***, and the putative DEAD-box helicase,** *spn-E,* **lysate, target cleavage was slower for siRNAs with a are required for RNAi in** *Drosophila* **oocytes (Kennerdell 2-deoxy nucleotide at the 5 end of the antisense strand et al., 2002). Both mutants fail to silence** *Ste***, as evi- than for standard siRNAs (Figure 2B). Furthermore, the denced by the accumulation of Ste protein crystals in rate of target cleavage was fastest when the siRNA was the testes of** *aub* **and** *spn-E* **mutants (Schmidt et al., phosphorylated before its addition to the reaction (Fig-1999; Stapleton et al., 2001). No Ste protein is detected ure 2B). A similar enhancement from pre-phosphorylain wild-type testes (Figure 1A). Strikingly, Ste protein tion was reported for siRNA injected into** *Drosophila* **accumulates in testes of two different** *armi* **alleles,** *armi1* **embryos (Boutla et al., 2001). We conclude that lysates and** *armi* **from** *Drosophila* **ovaries faithfully recapitulate RNAi di-** *72.1* **(Figures 1B and 1C). Neither allele is expected to be a true null because** *armi* **rected by siRNA duplexes.** *<sup>1</sup>* **is caused by a P element insertion 5 to the open reading frame, whereas** *armi72.1***, which was created by an imprecise excision** *armi* **Ovary Lysates Are Defective in RNAi In contrast to wild-type, lysates prepared from** *armi72.1* **of the** *armi1* **P element, corresponds to a deletion of sequences in the 5 untranslated region (C. Klattenhoff ovaries do not support siRNA-directed target cleavage in vitro: no cleavage product was observed in the** *armi72.1* **and W.E.T., unpublished observations). Ste silencing is re-established in males homozygous for the revertant lysate after 2 hr (Figure 3A). This result was observed chromosome,** *armi* **for more than ten independently prepared lysates. To** *rev 39.2* **(henceforth,** *armirev***; Cook et al., 2004), which was generated by excision of the** *armi1* **P determine if the RNAi defect was allele specific, we tested ovaries from** *armi1* **element (Figure 1D). These data suggest a role for Armi . Phenotypically, this allele is**

**implicates both** *armi* **alleles in endogenous RNAi, but eggs lacked dorsal appendages, compared to 67% for** *armi1* **eggs, and some** *armi1* **provides only a qualitative measure of allele strength. eggs had wild-type or par-**

**Since Ste protein in males reduces their fertility (Belloni et al., 2002), the percent of embryos that hatch when mutant males are mated to wild-type (Oregon R) females provides a more quantitative measure of** *Ste* **dysregulation. We measured hatch rates for the offspring of wildtype,** *armi1* **,** *armi72.1***, and** *spn-E1* **homozygous males mated to Oregon R females. For** *spn-E1* **males, 82% of the progeny hatched (n 652). Seventy-five percent of the progeny of** *armi1* **males hatched (n 571), but only 45% for** *armi72.1* **(n 710). In contrast, 97% of the offspring of wild-type males hatched (n 688). Thus,** *armi72.1* **is a stronger allele than** *armi1* **, at least with respect to the requirement for** *armi* **in testes.**

## **Ovary Lysate Recapitulates RNAi In Vitro**

*Drosophila* **syncitial blastoderm embryo lysate has been used widely to study the RNAi pathway (Tuschl et al., 1999). However,** *armi* **flies lay few eggs, making it difficult to collect enough embryos to make lysate. To surmount this problem, we prepared lysates from ovaries manually dissected from wild-type or mutant females. Approximately 10 l of lysate can be prepared from 50**

**We used the well-characterized siRNA-directed mRNA flies (D) were stained for DNA (red) and Ste protein (green). cleavage assay (Elbashir et al., 2001b, 2001c) to evaluate the capacity of ovary lysate to support RNAi in vitro. Incubation in ovary lysate of a 5 <sup>32</sup> results suggest that** *armi* **is required for the assembly P-cap-radiolabeled siRNA duplex yielded the 5 cleavage product diagnostic Results of RNAi (Figure 2A). siRNAs containing 5 hydroxyl groups are rapidly phosphorylated in vitro and in vivo, Armi Is Required for** *Ste* **Silencing but modifications that block phosphorylation eliminate Silencing of the X-linked** *Ste* **gene by the highly homolo- siRNA activity (Nyka¨ nen et al., 2001; Chiu and Rana,**

**in** *Drosophila* **RNAi. weaker than** *armi72.1* **in its effects on both male fertility (above) and oogenesis. For** *armi72.1* **Immunofluorescent detection of Ste protein in testes females, 92% of the**

**less RISC was produced in** *armi72.1***. (B) mRNA cleavage rate in ovary lysate using 5 modified siRNA. Filled squares, 5 PO4 The defect in RISC assembly in** *armi* **mutants is similar <sup>2</sup> (2 dT); filled circles, 5 PO4 <sup>2</sup> (2 riboU);**

# **in RISC Assembly**

**The rate of target cleavage was much slower for** *armi1* **Identification of Intermediates in RISC Assembly than for wild-type (Figure 3D). Since the rate of target These data suggest that both** *armi* **and** *aub* **are required**

**of RISC (Schwarz et al., 2003), we hypothesized that** *armi* **mutants are defective in RISC assembly. To test this hypothesis, we developed a method to measure RISC that requires less lysate than previously described techniques (Figure 4A). Double-stranded siRNA was incubated with ovary lysate in a standard RNAi reaction. To detect RISC, we added a 5 32P-radiolabled, 2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotide complementary to the antisense strand of the siRNA. Like target RNAs, 2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotides can bind to RISC containing a complementary siRNA, but unlike RNA targets, they cannot be cleaved and binding is essentially irreversible (Hutva´ gner et al., 2004). RISC/2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotide complexes were then resolved by electrophoresis through an agarose gel.**

**To validate the method, we examined RISC formation in embryo lysate. Four distinct complexes (C1, C2, C3, C4) were formed when siRNA was added to the reaction (Supplemental Figure S1A at http://www.cell.com/cgi/ content/full/116/6/831/DC1). Formation of these complexes required ATP and was disrupted by pre-treatment of the lysate with the alkylating agent** *N***-ethylmaleimide (NEM), but it was refractory to NEM treatment after RISC assembly; these are all properties of RNAi itself (Nyka¨ nen et al., 2001). No complex was observed with an siRNA unrelated to the 2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotide (Supplemental Figure S1A on the** *Cell* **website, "un"). The amount of complex formed by different siRNA sequences correlated well with their capacity to mediate cleavage (data not shown). The four complexes were also detected in wild-type ovary lysate (Supplemental Figure S1B online), suggesting that the same RNAi machinery is used during oogenesis and early embryogenesis. The lower amount of RISC formed in ovary compared to embryo lysates can be explained by the lower overall protein concentration of ovary lysates.**

**We used the 2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotide/native gel assay to analyze RISC assembly in** *armi* **mutant ovary lysates.** *armi* **mutants were deficient in RISC assembly. Representative data are shown in Figure 4B and quantitative results from four independent assays in Figure 4C. The extent of the deficit correlated with allele strength: Figure 2.** *Drosophila* **Ovary Lysate Can Recapitulate RNAi In Vitro less C3/C4 complex formed in lysate from the strong (A) RNAi reactions in embryo and ovary lysates using complemen-** *armi72.1* **allele than from** *armi1* **(Figures 4B and 4C). Com- tary siRNA duplexes (with 5 modifications) or an unrelated siRNA pared to the phenotypically wild-type** *armirev***, 10-fold (un).**

**open squares, 5 OH (2 dT); open circles, 5 OH (2 riboU). to that observed in lysates from** *aubHN2* **ovaries (Figures 4B and 4C).** *aub* **mutants do not support RNAi following egg activation and fail to silence the** *Ste* **locus in testes tially fused dorsal appendages (Figure 3B). Consistent (Schmidt et al., 1999; Kennerdell et al., 2002), and lysates with its weaker phenotype, the** *armi1* **allele showed a from** *aubHN2* **ovaries do not support RNAi in vitro (data small amount of RNAi activity in vitro (Figure 3C). The not shown). Aub is one of five** *Drosophila* **Argonaute two alleles were analyzed together at least four times proteins, core constituents of RISC. It is therefore not using independently prepared lysates. In all assays, total surprising that Aub is required for RISC assembly. Since protein concentration was adjusted to be equal. Lysate RISC assembly in vitro was not detectable in** *aubHN2* **from the revertant allele,** *armirev***, which has wild-type lysates, our data suggest that Aub is the primary dorsal appendages, showed robust RNAi, demonstra- Argonaute protein recruited to exogenous siRNA in** *Dro***ting that the RNAi defect in the mutants is caused by** *sophila* **ovaries. In contrast, ovaries from** *nanosBN***, a mamutation of** *armi***, not an unlinked gene. ternal effect mutant not implicated in RNAi, were fully competent for both RISC assembly (Figure 4C) and** *armi* **Ovary Lysates Are Impaired siRNA-directed target RNA cleavage (data not shown).**

**cleavage in this assay usually reflects the concentration genetically for RISC assembly, but they provide no in-**

**Figure 3.** *armi* **Ovary Lysates Are Defective in RNAi**

**(A) RNAi reactions in lysates from 0–2 hr embryos, wild-type or** *armi72.1* **mutant ovaries.**

**(B) Dorsal appendage phenotype was assessed for alleles of** *armi***.**

**(C) The fraction of target mRNA cleaved after 2 hr in an RNAi reaction using ovary lysates from** *armi* **alleles.**

**(D) mRNA cleavage rate in wild-type and** *armi1* **ovary lysates programmed with siRNA.**

**sight into the molecular basis of their RISC assembly strand into RISC, whereas siRNA 2 loads the sense defect(s). At what step(s) in RISC assembly are** *armi* **strand (Schwarz et al., 2003). The two siRNA duplexes and** *aub* **blocked? In order to answer this question, we are identical, except that siRNA 2 contains a C-to-U identified protein-siRNA intermediates in the RISC as- substitution at position 1, which inverts the asymmetry sembly pathway. Our 2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotide/ (Schwarz et al., 2003). For both siRNAs, the antisense strand was 3 <sup>32</sup> native gel method detects only complexes competent P-radiolabeled and will always be presto bind target RNA (mature RISC). Therefore, we used ent in complexes that contain double-stranded siRNA. However, RISC will contain the <sup>32</sup> a native gel assay designed to detect intermediates in P-radiolabeled antithe assembly of RISC. We radiolabeled the siRNA, sense strand only for siRNA 1. siRNA 2 will also make allowing detection of complexes containing either sin- RISC, but it will contain the nonradioactive sense strand. gle-stranded or double-stranded siRNA and used func- When either siRNA 1 or siRNA 2 was used to assemble tionally asymmetric siRNAs (Schwarz et al., 2003) to RISC in embryo lysate, two complexes (B and A, Figure distinguish between complexes containing single- and 5B) were detected in the native gel assay; a third com-**

**et al., 2002; Schwarz et al., 2002, 2003). Functionally and corresponds to RISC. Complexes B and A are good asymmetric siRNAs load only one of the two strands of candidates for RISC assembly intermediates. Formation an siRNA duplex into RISC and degrade the other strand of all three complexes was dramatically reduced when (Schwarz et al., 2003); the relative stability of the 5 ends the antisense siRNA strand contained a 5 methoxy of the two strands determines which is loaded into RISC group (siRNA 3, Figure 5B), a modification which blocks (Aza-Blanc et al., 2003; Khvorova et al., 2003; Schwarz RNAi (Nyka¨ nen et al., 2001). When the antisense strand**

**double-stranded siRNA. plex was detected only with siRNA 1 (Figure 5B). This RISC contains only a single siRNA strand (Martinez third complex therefore contains single-stranded siRNA et al., 2003). siRNA 1 (Figure 5A) loads its antisense of the siRNA contained a single 5-deoxy nucleotide,**

**Figure 4. Armi and Aub Are Required for RISC Assembly**

**(A) RISC assembly assay.**

**(B) A representative RISC assembly assay using wild-type and mutant** *Drosophila* **ovary lysates. A complex formed irrespective of siRNA addition is marked with an asterisk.**

**(C) Amount of RISC complexes C3/C4 formed in wild-type and mutant ovary lysates. The data are the average of four independent trials; error bars indicate standard deviation. For each trial, the data were normalized to the amount of complex observed in** *armirev* **lysate, and the background observed in the absence of siRNA was subtracted from the amount of complex formed when siRNA was included in the corresponding reaction. 5-phosphorylated, 2 dT siRNA was used to maximize RISC assembly. All reactions contained equal amounts of total protein.**

**making it a poor substrate for phosphorylation in the Complexes B, A, and RISC also formed in ovary lysate lysate (Nyka¨ nen et al., 2001), assembly of all three com- (Figure 5C). As for embryo lysate, complexes B and A plexes was reduced (siRNA 4, Figure 5B). Phosphorylat- contained double-stranded siRNA, whereas RISC coning the 5 deoxy-substituted siRNA before the reaction tained single-stranded (compare siRNA 1 and 2, Figure restored complex assembly (siRNA 5, Figure 5B). Forma- 5C). No complexes formed in ovary lysate when siRNA tion of complex A and of RISC required ATP. In contrast, 5 phosphorylation was blocked (siRNA 3, Figure 5C) complex B assembled efficiently in the absence of ATP, and complex assembly was reduced when siRNA phosbut only if the siRNA was phosphorylated prior to the phorylation was slow (siRNA 4, Figure 5C). reaction (compare ATP, siRNA 4 versus siRNA 5, Fig- To determine the relationship of complexes B, A, and ure 5B). RISC, we monitored the kinetics of complex formation**

**Cell 836**

**Figure 5. Identification of Intermediates in RISC Assembly**

**(A) siRNA duplexes used for native gel analysis. The strand that enters the RISC is indicated in blue, deoxynucleotides are in green, and the 32P-radiolabeled phosphates are red, marked with an asterisk.**

**(B) Native gel analysis of the protein-siRNA complexes formed in embryo lysate using the 3 32P-radiolabeled siRNAs in (A). F, free siRNA.**

**(C) Native gel analysis of the protein-siRNA complexes formed in wild-type ovary lysate using the 3 32P-radiolabeled siRNAs in (A). Free siRNA is not shown on this gel.**

**(D) Timecourse of the assembly of 5 32P-radiolabeled siRNA into protein complexes.**

**(E) Kinetic modeling of the data in (D). Blue circles, free siRNA; red, complex B; green, complex A; black, RISC. Solid lines show the corresponding modeled timecourses. The length of the arrows indicates the relative forward and reverse rate constants that best describe the data.**

**(F) Complex B can be "chased" into RISC. 5 32P-radiolabeled siRNA was preincubated with embryo lysate for 5 min to assemble complex B, then a 20-fold excess of unlabeled siRNA was added (time 0) and the disappearance of complex B and the production of complexes A and RISC monitored by native gel electrophoresis.**

**(Figure 5E). Of all possible models relating free siRNA, tion of complexes. Complex B disappeared with time, B, A, and RISC, only the simple linear pathway siRNA A increased with time then peaked at 60 min, and RISC** → **B** → **A** → **RISC fit well to our data (see Experimental accumulated throughout the experiment (Figure 5F). The Procedures). The modeled rate constants for the path- amount of radiolabeled free siRNA was essentially unway are consistent with the observation that formation changed throughout the experiment, demonstrating that of complex B is ATP independent, but RISC is ATP de- the unlabeled siRNA effectively blocked incorporation of <sup>32</sup> pendent. P-free siRNA into complex. Thus, B was chased into**

**our prediction that complex B is a precursor to RISC chase experiment provide support for a RISC assembly (via A). Complex B was assembled by incubating 32P- pathway in which the siRNA passes through two succesradiolabeled siRNA in embryo lysate for 5 min, then a sive, double-stranded siRNA-containing complexes, B 20-fold excess of unlabeled siRNA added to prevent and A, in order to be transformed into the singlefurther incorporation of stranded siRNA-containing RISC. 32P-siRNA into complex. Then**

**(Figure 5D) and analyzed the data by kinetic modeling we continued the incubation and monitored the forma- We also performed a "chase" experiment to confirm RISC, likely via A. Together, our kinetic modeling and**

**(A) Dcr-2 and R2D2 are efficiently crosslinked by 302 nm light to an siRNA containing 5-iodouracil at position 20. The siRNA was incubated with embryo lysate, crosslinked with UV light, immunoprecipitated with the antiserum indicated above each lane, then analyzed by 4%–20% gradient SDS-PAGE.**

**(B) Upper panel: the 5-iodouracil siRNA was incubated with embryo lysate crosslinked, then resolved on a native gel. Complexes B, A, and R (RISC) were excised from the gel and the protein-siRNA crosslinks present in complexes B, A, and R (RISC) analyzed by 10% SDS-PAGE. Lower panel: complexes B, A, and R (RISC) were isolated from a native gel, then analyzed by Western blotting with -Dcr-2 or -R2D2 antisera. (C) Native gel analysis of the complexes formed in** *r2d2* **and (D)** *armi1* **,** *armi72.1***, and** *aubHN2* **homozygous mutant ovary lysates. Minor variations in the abundance of B and A did not correlate with** *armi* **allele strength, suggesting that neither Armi nor Aub are required for their production. In (C) and (D), the portion of the gel corresponding to free siRNA, F, is shown below. Equal amounts of total protein were used in each reaction. The siRNA was 5 32P-radiolabeled in (A)–(C) and 3 32P-radiolabeled in (D). Less RISC was detected for wild-type lysate in this experiment compared to (C) because the lysate was diluted 3-fold to equalize its protein concentration to that of the** *aub* **mutant lysate.**

**erodimeric complex, comprising Dicer-2 (Dcr-2) and the ing) and analyzed by Western blotting with either dsRNA binding protein R2D2, loads siRNA into RISC -Dcr-2 or -R2D2 antibodies. Again, complexes A and (Liu et al., 2003). Complex A contains the Dcr-2/R2D2 RISC, but not B, contained both Dcr-2 and R2D2 (Figure heterodimer. R2D2 and Dcr-2 are readily crosslinked to 6B). Finally, we tested complex assembly in ovary ly- 32P-radiolabeled siRNA with UV light (Liu et al., 2003). sates prepared from** *r2d2* **homozygous mutant females. We synthesized an siRNA containing a single photo- Only complex B formed in these lysates (Figure 6C). crosslinkable nucleoside base (5-iodouracil) at position We conclude that complex A contains the previously 20 (Supplemental Figure S2A online). The identified Dcr-2/R2D2 heterodimer (Liu et al., 2003), and 32P-5-iodouracil siRNA was incubated with embryo lysate to assemble that both Dcr-2 and R2D2 remain associated with at complexes, then irradiated with 302 nm light, which initi- least a subpopulation of RISC, consistent with earlier ates protein-RNA crosslinking only at the 5-iodo-substi- reports that Dcr-2 in flies and both DCR-1 and the nematuted nucleoside. Proteins covalently linked to the tode homolog of R2D2, RDE-4, coimmunoprecipitate 32Pradiolabeled siRNA were resolved by SDS-PAGE. Two with Argonaute proteins (Hammond et al., 2001; Tabara proteins—200 kDa and 40 kDa—efficiently cross- et al., 2002). linked to the siRNA (Supplemental Figure S2D online). Both crosslinked proteins were coimmunoprecipitated** *armi* **Mutants Are Defective for the Conversion with either -Dcr-2 or -R2D2 serum, but not normal of Complex A to RISC rabbit serum (Figure 6A). Neither crosslink was observed RISC does not form in ovary lysates from** *armi* **or** *aub* **in ovary lysates prepared from** *r2d2* **homozygous mutant mutants (Figures 4B and 4C). However, both complexes females (data not shown), a result expected because B and A were readily detected in** *armi* **and** *aub* **mutants Dcr-2 is unstable in the absence of R2D2 (Liu et al., (Figure 6D). Thus,** *armi* **and** *aub* **mutants are impaired 2003). Additional experiments validating the UV cross- in a step in RISC assembly after binding of the siRNA linking assay are provided in Supplemental Methods, to the Dcr-2/R2D2 heterodimer.**

**lyzed by native gel electrophoresis to resolve complexes RISC. To test this hypothesis, we tested if single-B, A, and RISC. Each complex was eluted from the gel stranded siRNA circumvented the requirement for** *armi***. and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Figure 6B shows that the In vitro and in vivo, single-stranded siRNA triggers RNAi,**

**Complex A Contains the R2D2/Dicer-2 Heterodimer A and RISC, but not B. In a parallel experiment, com-Liu and colleagues have previously proposed that a het- plexes B, A, and RISC were isolated (without crosslink-**

**Supplemental Figure S2, and Supplemental Table S1. Armi might act after the formation of complex A to The crosslinking was repeated, and the reaction ana- unwind siRNA duplexes prior to their assembly into R2D2 and Dcr-2 crosslinks were present in complexes albeit inefficiently (Martinez et al., 2002; Schwarz et al.,** **2002).** *armi* **ovary lysates failed to support RNAi when the reactions were programmed with 5-phosphorylated, single-stranded siRNA (Supplemental Figure S3A online). The defect with single-stranded siRNA correlated with allele strength: some activity was seen in lysates from the weak allele,** *armi1* **, but none for the strong allele,** *armi72.1***. The requirement for a putative ATPase— Armi—in RNAi triggered by single-stranded siRNA suggested to us the presence of an additional ATP-dependent step in the RISC assembly, after siRNA unwinding.**

**To test if loading of single-stranded siRNA into RISC requires ATP, we added 5-phosphorylated, singlestranded siRNA to embryo lysates depleted of ATP. After incubation for 2 hr, no cleavage product was detected, suggesting that there is at least one ATP-dependent step downstream of siRNA unwinding (Supplemental Figure S3B). The stability of single-stranded siRNA was not reduced by ATP depletion. In fact, single-stranded siRNA was slightly more stable in the absence of ATP (Supplemental Figure S3C online). Thus differential stability cannot account for the requirement for ATP in RNAi triggered by single-stranded siRNA. In the RNAi pathway, there are at least three steps after siRNA unwinding: RISC assembly, target recognition, and target cleavage. To assess if either target recognition or cleavage was ATP dependent, we incubated single-stranded siRNA in a standard RNAi reaction with ATP to assemble RISC. Next, NEM was added to inactivate the ATPregenerating enzyme, creatine kinase, and to block further RISC assembly. NEM was quenched with dithi- Figure 7. A Model for RNA Silencing in** *Drosophila* **deplete ATP. Finally, mRNA target was added and the siRNA into RISC, whereas Aub is drawn as a RISC component. reaction incubated for 2 hr. Using this protocol, high ATP levels were maintained during RISC assembly, but less than 100 nM ATP was present during the encounter the smallest, most abundant complexes may contain**

**are often lethal or female sterile, making the molecular assembly. Complex B forms rapidly upon incubation of characterization of these mutants difficult. Our finding siRNA in lysate, in the absence of ATP. The siRNA is then that lysates that support RNAi in vitro can be prepared transferred to complex A, which contains the previously from manually dissected ovaries has allowed us to ana- identified R2D2/Dcr-2 heterodimer. The siRNA is double lyze the molecular function of** *armi***, a maternal effect stranded in both B and A. RISC is formed from complex gene required for RNAi. Our methods should find broad A by a process that requires both siRNA unwinding and application in the molecular characterization of other ATP. Both** *aub* **and** *armi* **are required genetically for the**

**mon to embryo and ovary lysates (C1-4 in Supplemental tion of RISC from complex A and our finding that incor-Figure S1 and Figure 4). In ovaries, formation of these poration of single-stranded siRNA into RISC requires complexes is reduced 10-fold in** *armi* **mutants and is ATP suggest that Armi functions to incorporate singleundetectable in** *aub* **mutants, which were shown pre- stranded siRNA into RISC (Figure 7). However, our data viously to be RNAi defective (Kennerdell et al., 2002). cannot distinguish between direct and indirect roles for The requirement for Aub, an Argonaute protein, sug- Armi in RISC assembly. gests that the complexes correspond to distinct RISC The***Arabidopsis* **homolog of Armi, SDE3, together with isoforms built on a common core of Aub and siRNA. the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) SDE1/ These isoforms may play distinct regulatory roles (e.g., SGS2, is required for PTGS triggered by transgenes that translational repression versus cleavage). Alternatively, express single-stranded sense mRNA, but not silencing**

**othreitol (DTT), and hexokinase and glucose added to Armi is envisioned to facilitate the ATP-dependent incorporation of**

**of RISC with the target RNA. Target recognition and only the most stably associated protein constituents, cleavage did not require ATP when RISC was pro- whereas the larger, less abundant complexes may corgrammed with either double- or single-stranded siRNA, respond to "holo-RISC" that retain more weakly bound provided that ATP was supplied during RISC assembly proteins. Clearly, a major challenge for the future is to (Supplemental Figure S3D). define the protein constituents of each complex, their functional capacity, and their biological role. The devel-Discussion opment of a native gel assay that resolves distinct RISC complexes represents a step toward that goal.**

**In** *Drosophila***, mutations affecting the RNAi pathway We have also identified two intermediates in RISC maternal genes required for the RNAi pathway. production of RISC from complex A. The involvement We detected four distinct RISC-like complexes com- of Armi, a putative RNA helicase protein, in the produc-**

**stored at 80C. RNAi reactions were assembled using equal triggered by some RNA viruses (Dalmay et al., 2001). amounts of total protein for all genotypes within an experiment. SDE3 has been proposed to facilitate the conversion of dsRNA into siRNA or the conversion of mRNA into Synthetic siRNA complementary RNA by SDE1/SGS2 (Dalmay et al., The siRNAs were prepared from synthetic 21 nt RNAs (Dharmacon 2001; Jorgensen, 2003). Recent studies show that SDE3 Research). Sense siRNA sequences used were 5-HO-CGU ACG is not required for the production of siRNAs derived CGG AAU ACU UCG AAA-3 (5 OH [riboU], 5 CH3O [2 dT], 5 OH directly from a long dsRNA hairpin (Himber et al., 2003). [2 dT]) and 5-HO-UGA GGU AGU AGG UUG UAU AGU-3 (un). Instead, SDE3 seems to play a role in the production of Antisense siRNA sequences used were 5-HO-UCG AAG UAU UCC GCG UAC GUG-3 (5 OH [riboU]); 5-CH3O-dTCG AAG UAU UCC siRNAs generated by an RdRP-dependent amplification GCG UAC GUG-3 (5 CH3O [2 dT]); 5-HO-dTCG AAG UAU UCC mechanism. Our data are not consistent with either of GCG UAC GUG-3 (5 OH [2 dT]); and 5-HO-UAU ACA ACC UAC these functions for Armi. First,** *Drosophila* **genomic, bio- UAC CUC AUU-3 (un). Appropriate pairs of siRNA strands were chemical, and genetic data exclude a role for an RdRP annealed to form siRNA duplexes as described (Elbashir et al., in RNAi (Celotto and Graveley, 2002; Schwarz et al., 2001b) and used at a final concentration of 20 nM (Figures 2, 5H, 2002; Roignant et al., 2003; Tang et al., 2003). Second, and 5I) or 50 nM (Figure 3). siRNA single strands were phosphorylated with polynucleotide kinase according to the manufacturer's Armi is required for RISC assembly in** *Drosophila* **ovary protocol (PNK; New England Biolabs) and used at 200 nM (final con- lysates when RISC is programmed with siRNA, sug- centration). gesting a role for Armi downstream of the conversion of dsRNA into siRNA, but upstream of target recognition RISC Assembly by RISC. The apparently divergent functions of SDE3 RISC assembly was as described (Zamore et al., 2000), except that and Armi could be reconciled if RISC is required for the reaction contained 40% (v/v) embryo or ovary lysate and 50 nM RdRP-mediated amplification of silencing. Alternatively, siRNA duplex. Lysates were adjusted with lysis buffer to contain**

**toderm embryos, but a low level can be detected through- oligonucleotide and to quench RISC assembly. (Mature RISC is out development, including in somatic tissues (Cook et refractory to heparin: 1 mg/ml [final concentration] heparin added al., 2004). While the requirement for** *armi* **at the start of the reaction blocked RNAi in the cleavage assay, but in spermatohad no effect when added together with target RNA.) Then the 5 genesis and oogenesis makes Armi a good candidate 32P-radiolabled 2-***O***-methyl oligonucleotide (5-CAU CAC GUA CGC for a component of the RNAi machinery in germ cells GGA AUA CUU CGA AAU GUC C-3) was added at 2 nM final concen- and early embryos, somatic functions for Armi are also tration and incubated for 2 hr. After the addition of 3.0% (w/v) Ficollpossible. In this respect,** *armi* **is reminiscent of the ma- 400, complexes were resolved by native gel electrophoresis at 4 W ternally expressed Argonaute protein,** *piwi***, which is also for 2 hr at room temperature. Native gels were 1 mm thick, 1.5% required during oogenesis. Although** *piwi* **mutants dis- (w/v) agarose (GTG grade), 0.5 TBE with 1.5 mM MgCl2, cast vertically between a standard glass plate and a ground glass plate play no obvious somatic phenotype (Cox et al., 1998), (National Glass Works, Worcester, Massachusetts). To detect inter- Piwi is required in the soma both for posttranscriptional mediates in RISC assembly, 32P-radiolabeled siRNA was incubated transgene silencing and for some types of transcrip- with lysate for 1 hr, unless otherwise noted. No heparin was added tional silencing (Pal-Bhadra et al., 2002). Whether Armi to these reactions. After incubation, the samples were adjusted to is likewise required for somatic transgene silencing re- 3.0% (w/v) Ficoll-400 and resolved by vertical native gel electropho-**

## **Experimental Procedures Kinetic Modeling**

**(Nyka¨ nen et al., 2001).**

## **Stellate Immunofluorescence**

**Testes were dissected in testes fixation buffer (1 mM EDTA, 183 mM KCl, 47 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 6.8) and fixed with formaldehyde as described (Theurkauf, 1994). Ste protein was labeled with anti-Ste IgG at 1:100. Images were analyzed by confocal microscopy using a Leica TCS-SP inverted laser scanning microscope. DNA was stained with TOTO-3 (Molecular Probes).**

**Precision Instruments 500232) and collected in 1 PBS buffer in k4, k-4, k5, k-5, k6, and k-6 to generate Figure 5E. 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. Ovaries were centrifuged at 11,000 g for 5 min at 4C. The PBS was removed from the ovary pellet, then Crosslinking 5 <sup>32</sup> ovaries were homogenized in 1 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (100 mM P-radiolabeled siRNA duplex was used at 4 million counts per potassium acetate, 30 mM HEPES-KOH at pH 7.4, 2 mM magnesium minute in a standard RNAi reaction, incubated 45–60 min at 25C, acetate) containing 5 mM DTT and 1 mg/ml complete "mini" EDTA- then transferred to a 96-well round bottom plate on ice. Samples free protease inhibitor tablets (Roche) per gram of ovaries using a were irradiated for 10–15 min with 302 nm light using an Ultraviolet plastic "pellet pestle" (Kontes). Lysate was clarified by centrifugation Products model TM-36 transilluminator inverted directly onto the at 14,000 g for 25 min at 4C. The supernatant was aliquoted into polystyrene lid of the 96-well plate. Samples were then adjusted to chilled microcentrifuge tubes, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and 1 SDS-SB (62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 2% SDS,**

**equal amounts of protein. Following incubation at 25C for 20 min, SDE3 and Armi may not have homologous functions. 1 mg/ml heparin was added and incubated for 10 min. Heparin** *armi* **mRNA is abundant in oocytes and syncitial blas- served to reduce nonspecific binding of proteins to the 2-***O***-methyl mains to be tested. resis as above. Gels were dried under vacuum onto Hybond-N nylon membrane (Amersham).**

**Data from native gel analysis of siRNA-containing complexes were General Methods initially fit using Berkeley Madonna 8.0.1 software to the global Target RNA cleavage assay was performed as described (Haley et model: al., 2003). ATP depletion and NEM quenching were as published**

**Rates for k4, k-4, k5, k-5, k6, and k-6 ranged from 5-fold (k5) to 108 -fold Ovary Lysate Preparation (k-4) slower than the slowest forward rate for the linear pathway F** → **Wild-type or mutant fly ovaries were dissected with forceps (World B** → **A** → **RISC. The data were therefore modeled neglecting rates**

**0.02% (w/v) Bromophenol Blue, 100 mM DTT), heated to 95C for Celotto, A.M., and Graveley, B.R. (2002). Exon-specific RNAi: A tool 5 min, and resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. for dissecting the functional relevance of alternative splicing. RNA**

**Normal rabbit, -Dcr-2, and -R2D2 antisera were first bound to tural and functional features of small interfering RNA. Mol. Cell protein A agarose beads for 2 hr at 4C in lysis buffer. After washing** *10***, 549–561. with RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% [v/v] NP40, 0.5% [w/v] sodium Cogoni, C., and Macino, G. (1997). Isolation of quelling-defective deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6), the beads (25 (qde) mutants impaired in posttranscriptional transgene-induced l) were incubated with 15 l of crosslinked lysate for 2 hr at 4C. gene silencing in Neurospora crassa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA After washing in RIPA buffer, the beads were boiled in 1 SDS-** *<sup>94</sup>***, 10233–10238. SB and the eluted proteins resolved by SDS-PAGE. For Western Cox, D.N., Chao, A., Baker, J., Chang, L., Qiao, D., and Lin, H. (1998). blotting, the complexes were excised from the native gel, boiled in A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are <sup>1</sup> SDS-SB at 95C for 10 min, and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Western essential for stem cell self-renewal. Genes Dev.** *<sup>12</sup>***, 3715–3727. blotting was performed with 1:1000 dilution for -Dcr-2 antisera and 1:5000 for -R2D2. Dalmay, T., Hamilton, A., Rudd, S., Angell, S., and Baulcombe, D.C.**

**We thank John Leszyk for mass spectrometry; Juanita McLachlan Dalmay, T., Horsefield, R., Braunstein, T.H., and Baulcombe, D.C. for maintaining our fly colony; and members of the Zamore lab (2001). SDE3 encodes an RNA helicase required for post-transcripfor encouragement and helpful discussions. -Dcr-2 and -R2D2 tional gene silencing in Arabidopsis. EMBO J.** *20***, 2069–2078. antibodies were the kind gifts of Qinghua Liu and Xiaodong Wang; Doi, N., Zenno, S., Ueda, R., Ohki-Hamazaki, H., Ui-Tei, K., and -Ste antibody was the kind gift of Maria Pia Bozzetti; normal rabbit Saigo, K. (2003). Short-interfering-RNA-mediated gene silencing in serum was the kind gift of Alonzo Ross. r2d2 mutant flies were kindly mammalian cells requires Dicer and eIF2C translation initiation fac- provided by Dean P. Smith. H.A.C. was supported by a postdoctoral tors. Curr. Biol.** *<sup>13</sup>***, 41–46. training from the NIH and a Research Scholar Grant from the Ameri- Elbashir, S.M., Harborth, J., Lendeckel, W., Yalcin, A., Weber, K., can Cancer Society. P.D.Z. is a Pew Scholar in the Biomedical Sci- and Tuschl, T. (2001a). Duplexes of 21-nucleotide RNAs mediate ences and a W.M. Keck Foundation Young Scholar in Medical Re- RNA interference in cultured mammalian cells. Nature** *<sup>411</sup>***, 494–498. search. This work was supported in part by grants from the National Elbashir, S.M., Lendeckel, W., and Tuschl, T. (2001b). RNA interfer- Institutes of Health to P.D.Z. (GM62862-01 and GM65236-01) and a grant from the Human Frontiers Science Program to W.E.T. ence is mediated by 21- and 22-nucleotide RNAs. Genes Dev.** *15***, 188–200. (RG0356/1997-M).**

**Accepted: February 9, 2004** *20***, 6877–6888.**

**Aravin, A.A., Naumova, N.M., Tulin, A.V., Vagin, V.V., Rozovsky, Y.M., 11654. and Gvozdev, V.A. (2001). Double-stranded RNA-mediated silencing Fire, A., Xu, S., Montgomery, M.K., Kostas, S.A., Driver, S.E., and of genomic tandem repeats and transposable elements in the** *D.* **Mello, C.C. (1998). Potent and specific genetic interference by dou-** *melanogaster* **germline. Curr. Biol.** *<sup>11</sup>***, 1017–1027. ble-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature** *<sup>391</sup>***, 806–811.**

**Hutva´ gner, G., and Zamore, P.D. (2002). A microRNA in a multiple- Catalanotto, C., Azzalin, G., Macino, G., and Cogoni, C. (2002). turnover RNAi enzyme complex. Science** *<sup>297</sup>***, 2056–2060. Involvement of small RNAs and role of the qde genes in the gene silencing pathway in Neurospora. Genes Dev.** *16***, 790–795. Hutva´ gner, G., Simard, M.J., Mello, C.C., and Zamore, P.D. (2004).**

**e98. DOI:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020098. Fragile X-related protein and VIG associate with the RNA interference machinery. Genes Dev.** *16***, 2491–2496. Ishizuka, A., Siomi, M.C., and Siomi, H. (2002). A Drosophila fragile**

*8***, 8–24.**

**Immunoprecipitation and Western Blotting Chiu, Y.-L., and Rana, T.M. (2002). RNAi in human cells: Basic struc-**

**(2000). An RNA-dependent RNA polymerase gene in Arabidopsis Acknowledgments is required for posttranscriptional gene silencing mediated by a transgene but not by a virus. Cell** *101***, 543–553.**

**Elbashir, S.M., Martinez, J., Patkaniowska, A., Lendeckel, W., and Received: October 3, 2003 Tuschl, T. (2001c). Functional anatomy of siRNAs for mediating effi-Revised: December 31, 2003 cient RNAi in Drosophila melanogaster embryo lysate. EMBO J.**

**Published: March 18, 2004 Fagard, M., Boutet, S., Morel, J.-B., Bellini, C., and Vaucheret, H. (2000). AGO1, QDE-2, and RDE-1 are related proteins required for References post-transcriptional gene silencing in plants, quelling in fungi, and RNA interference in animals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA** *97***, 11650–**

**Aza-Blanc, P., Cooper, C.L., Wagner, K., Batalov, S., Deveraux, Q.L., Grishok, A., Tabara, H., and Mello, C. (2000). Genetic requirements and Cooke, M.P. (2003). Identification of modulators of TRAIL- for inheritance of RNAi in** *C. elegans***. Science** *<sup>287</sup>***, 2494–2497. induced apoptosis via RNAi-based phenotypic screening. Mol. Cell Gvozdev, V.A., Aravin, A.A., Abramov, Y.A., Klenov, M.S., Kogan, G.L.,** *<sup>12</sup>***, 627–637. Lavrov, S.A., Naumova, N.M., Olenkina, O.M., Tulin, A.V., and Vagin, Belloni, M., Tritto, P., Bozzetti, M.P., Palumbo, G., and Robbins, V.V. (2003). Stellate repeats: targets of silencing and modules causing L.G. (2002). Does Stellate cause meiotic drive in Drosophila melano- cis-inactivation and trans-activation. Genetica** *<sup>117</sup>***, 239–245. gaster? Genetics** *<sup>161</sup>***, 1551–1559. Haley, B., Tang, G., and Zamore, P.D. (2003). In vitro analysis of Bernstein, E., Caudy, A.A., Hammond, S.M., and Hannon, G.J. (2001). RNA interference in Drosophila melanogaster. Methods** *<sup>30</sup>***, 330–336. Role for a bidentate ribonuclease in the initiation step of RNA inter- Hamilton, A.J., and Baulcombe, D.C. (1999). A species of small anti- ference. Nature** *<sup>409</sup>***, 363–366. sense RNA in posttranscriptional gene silencing in plants. Science Billy, E., Brondani, V., Zhang, H., Muller, U., and Filipowicz, W. (2001).** *<sup>286</sup>***, 950–952. Specific interference with gene expression induced by long, double- Hammond, S.M., Bernstein, E., Beach, D., and Hannon, G.J. (2000). stranded RNA in mouse embryonal teratocarcinoma cell lines. Proc. An RNA-directed nuclease mediates post-transcriptional gene si- Natl. Acad. Sci. USA** *<sup>98</sup>***, 14428–14433. lencing in Drosophila cells. Nature** *<sup>404</sup>***, 293–296. Boutla, A., Delidakis, C., Livadaras, I., Tsagris, M., and Tabler, M. Hammond, S.M., Boettcher, S., Caudy, A.A., Kobayashi, R., and (2001). Short 5-phosphorylated double-stranded RNAs induce RNA Hannon, G.J. (2001). Argonaute2, a link between genetic and bio- interference in Drosophila. Curr. Biol.** *<sup>11</sup>***, 1776–1780. chemical analyses of RNAi. Science** *<sup>293</sup>***, 1146–1150. Caplen, N.J., Parrish, S., Imani, F., Fire, A., and Morgan, R.A. (2001). Himber, C., Dunoyer, P., Moissiard, G., Ritzenthaler, C., and Voinnet, Specific inhibition of gene expression by small double-stranded O. (2003). Transitivity-dependent and -independent cell-to-cell RNAs in invertebrate and vertebrate systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. movement of RNA silencing. EMBO J.** *<sup>22</sup>***, 4523–4533. USA** *<sup>98</sup>***, 9742–9747.**

**Caudy, A.A., Myers, M., Hannon, G.J., and Hammond, S.M. (2002). Sequence-specific inhibition of small RNA function. PLoS Biol.** *2***,**

**X protein interacts with components of RNAi and ribosomal proteins. Schramke, V., and Allshire, R. (2003). Hairpin RNAs and retrotranspo-Genes Dev.** *16***, 2497–2508. son LTRs effect RNAi and chromatin-based gene silencing. Science**

*301***, 1069–1074. Jorgensen, R.A. (2003). Sense cosuppression in plants: Past, present, and future. In RNAi: A Guide To Gene Silencing, G.J. Hannon, Schwarz, D.S., Hutva´ gner, G., Haley, B., and Zamore, P.D. (2002). ed. (Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press), Evidence that siRNAs function as guides, not primers, in the** *Dro***pp. 5–22.** *sophila* **and human RNAi pathways. Mol. Cell** *10***, 537–548.**

**Kennerdell, J.R., and Carthew, R.W. (1998). Use of dsRNA-mediated Schwarz, D.S., Hutva´ gner, G., Du, T., Xu, Z., Aronin, N., and Zamore, genetic interference to demonstrate that** *frizzled* **and** *frizzled 2* **act P.D. (2003). Asymmetry in the assembly of the RNAi enzyme comin the wingless pathway. Cell** *95***, 1017–1026. plex. Cell** *115***, 199–208.**

**dent on aubergine and spindle-E. Genes Dev.** *16***, 1884–1889. 310–314.**

**Ketting, R.F., Haverkamp, T.H., van Luenen, H.G., and Plasterk, R.H. Stapleton, W., Das, S., and McKee, B.D. (2001). A role of the Dro- (1999). Mut-7 of C. elegans, required for transposon silencing and sophila homeless gene in repression of Stellate in male meiosis. RNA interference, is a homolog of Werner syndrome helicase and Chromosoma** *110***, 228–240.**

**Khvorova, A., Reynolds, A., and Jayasena, S.D. (2003). Functional mons, L., Fire, A., and Mello, C.C. (1999). The rde-1 gene, RNA siRNAs and miRNAs exhibit strand bias. Cell** *115***, 209–216. interference, and transposon silencing in** *C. elegans***. Cell** *99***,**

**123–132. Koonin, E.V. (1992). A new group of putative RNA helicases. Trends**

**Wang, X. (2003). R2D2, a bridge between the initiation and effector box helicase to direct RNAi in** *C. elegans***. Cell** *109***, 861–871.**

**mental genes in hydra. Dev. Biol.** *17***, 49–63.** *214***, 211–214.**

**toskeleton during oogenesis and early embryogenesis. Methods T. (2002). Single stranded antisense siRNA guide target RNA cleav- Cell Biol.** *<sup>44</sup>***, 489–505. age in RNAi. Cell** *<sup>110</sup>***, 563–574.**

**R.H. (2002). RNA helicase MUT-14-dependent gene silencing trig- bach, F., Proux, F., and Vaucheret, H. (2002). Fertile hypomorphic gered in C. elegans by short antisense RNAs. Science** *<sup>295</sup>***, 694–697. ARGONAUTE (ago1) mutants impaired in post-transcriptional gene silencing and virus resistance. Plant Cell** *14* **Tuschl, T., Zamore, P.D., Lehmann, R., Bartel, D.P., and Sharp, P.A. , 629–639.**

**vitro. Genes Dev.** *<sup>13</sup>***, 3191–3197. Abel, L., Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Dreyfuss, G. (2002). miRNPs: a novel class of Ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs. Volpe, T.A., Kidner, C., Hall, I.M., Teng, G., Grewal, S.I.S., and Mar-Genes Dev.** *16***, 720–728. tienssen, R.A. (2002). Regulation of heterchromatic silencing and**

**histone H3 lysine-9 methylation by RNAi. Science** *<sup>297</sup>***, 1833–1837. Mourrain, P., Beclin, C., Elmayan, T., Feuerbach, F., Godon, C., Morel, J.B., Jouette, D., Lacombe, A.M., Nikic, S., Picault, N., et al. Waterhouse, P.M., Graham, M.W., and Wang, M.B. (1998). Virus (2000). Arabidopsis SGS2 and SGS3 genes are required for posttran- resistance and gene silencing in plants can be induced by simultanescriptional gene silencing and natural virus resistance. Cell** *101* **ous expression of sense and antisense RNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. , 533–542. USA** *95***, 13959–13964.**

**RNA induces mRNA degradation in** *Trypanosoma brucei* **gene function by double-stranded RNA in early mouse development. . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA** *95* **Nat. Cell Biol.** *2***, 70–75. , 14687–14692.**

**and small interfering RNA structure in the RNA interference pathway. for efficient RNA interference in Drosophila embryos. Proc. Natl. Cell** *107* **Acad. Sci. USA** *99***, 6889–6894. , 309–321.**

**mechanisms affect both transcriptional and posttranscriptional gene and transposon silencing in chlamydomonas reinhardtii by a DEAH-Box RNA helicase. Science** *290***, 1159–1163. transgene silencing in** *Drosophila***. Mol. Cell** *9***, 315–327.**

**silencing without DNA. RNA-mediated cross-protection between double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-dependent cleavage of viruses. Plant Cell** *11* **mRNA at 21 to 23 nucleotide intervals. Cell** *101***, 25–33. , 1207–1216.**

**Roignant, J.Y., Carre, C., Mugat, B., Szymczak, D., Lepesant, J.A., and Antoniewski, C. (2003). Absence of transitive and systemic pathways allows cell-specific and isoform-specific RNAi in Drosophila. RNA** *9***, 299–308.**

**Sa´ nchez-Alvarado, A., and Newmark, P.A. (1999). Double-stranded RNA specifically disrupts gene expression during planarian regeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA** *96***, 5049–5054.**

**Saxena, S., Jonsson, Z.O., and Dutta, A. (2003). Small RNAs with imperfect match to endogenous mRNA repress translation: implications for off-target activity of siRNA in mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem.** *278***, 44312–44319. Published online September 2, 2003. 10.1074/jbc.M307089200.**

**Schmidt, A., Palumbo, G., Bozzetti, M.P., Tritto, P., Pimpinelli, S., and Schafer, U. (1999). Genetic and molecular characterization of sting, a gene involved in crystal formation and meiotic drive in the male germ line of Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics** *151***, 749–760.**

**Kennerdell, J.R., Yamaguchi, S., and Carthew, R.W. (2002). RNAi is Sijen, T., and Plasterk, R.H. (2003). Transposon silencing in the activated during Drosophila oocyte maturation in a manner depen- Caenorhabditis elegans germ line by natural RNAi. Nature** *426***,**

**RNaseD. Cell** *99***, 133–141. Tabara, H., Sarkissian, M., Kelly, W.G., Fleenor, J., Grishok, A., Tim-**

**Biochem. Sci.** *17***, 495–497. Tabara, H., Yigit, E., Siomi, H., and Mello, C.C. (2002). The dsRNA binding protein RDE-4 interacts with RDE-1, DCR-1, and a DexH- Liu, Q., Rand, T.A., Kalidas, S., Du, F., Kim, H.E., Smith, D.P., and**

**steps of the Drosophila RNAi pathway. Science** *301***, 1921–1925. Tang, G., Reinhart, B.J., Bartel, D.P., and Zamore, P.D. (2003). A biochemical framework for RNA silencing in plants. Genes Dev. Lohmann, J.U., Endl, I., and Bosch, T.C. (1999). Silencing of develop-**

**Martinez, J., Patkaniowska, A., Urlaub, H., Lu Theurkauf, W.E. (1994). Immunofluorescence analysis of the cy- ¨ hrmann, R., and Tuschl,**

**Morel, J.B., Godon, C., Mourrain, P., Beclin, C., Boutet, S., Feuer- Tijsterman, M., Ketting, R.F., Okihara, K.L., Sijen, T., and Plasterk,**

**Mourelatos, Z., Dostie, J., Paushkin, S., Sharma, A.K., Charroux, B., (1999). Targeted mRNA degradation by double-stranded RNA in**

**Ngo, H., Tschudi, C., Gull, K., and Ullu, E. (1998). Double-stranded Wianny, F., and Zernicka-Goetz, M. (2000). Specific interference with**

**Nyka¨ nen, A., Haley, B., and Zamore, P.D. (2001). ATP requirements Williams, R.W., and Rubin, G.M. (2002). ARGONAUTE1 is required**

**Pal-Bhadra, M., Bhadra, U., and Birchler, J.A. (2002). RNAi related Wu-Scharf, D., Jeong, B., Zhang, C., and Cerutti, H. (2000). Trans-**

**Ratcliff, F.G., MacFarlane, S.A., and Baulcombe, D.C. (1999). Gene Zamore, P.D., Tuschl, T., Sharp, P.A., and Bartel, D.P. (2000). RNAi:**