**Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells 3in IP -Induced Ca2+ Release, Capacitative Ca2+ Entry, and Proliferation of A7r5 Crucial Role of Type 1, but Not Type 3, Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate (IP3) Receptors**

Copyright © 2001 American Heart Association. All rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0009-7330. Online ISSN: 72514 Circulation Research is published by the American Heart Association. 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX *Circ. Res.* 2001;88;202-209 Hagiwara, Katsuhiko Mikoshiba, Teruhiko Toyo-oka, Masao Omata and Yoshiyuki Sakaki Yuepeng Wang, Jie Chen, Yue Wang, Colin W. Taylor, Yasunobu Hirata, Hisashi

1524-4571

<http://circres.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/88/2/202> the World Wide Web at: The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on

<http://circres.ahajournals.org/subscriptions/> Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Circulation Research is online at

[journalpermissions@lww.com](mailto:journalpermissions@lww.com) 410-528-8550. E-mail: Health, 351 West Camden Street, Baltimore, MD 21202-2436. Phone: 410-528-4050. Fax: Permissions: Permissions & Rights Desk, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a division of Wolters Kluwer 

<http://www.lww.com/reprints> Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at 

# **Crucial Role of Type 1, but Not Type 3, Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate (IP3) Receptors in IP3-Induced Ca2**<sup>1</sup> **Release, Capacitative Ca2**<sup>1</sup> **Entry, and Proliferation of A7r5 Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells**

Yuepeng Wang, Jie Chen, Yue Wang, Colin W. Taylor, Yasunobu Hirata, Hisashi Hagiwara, Katsuhiko Mikoshiba, Teruhiko Toyo-oka, Masao Omata, Yoshiyuki Sakaki

*Abstract*—Stimulation of G protein– or tyrosine kinase–coupled receptors regulates cell proliferation through intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> ([Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i ) signaling. In A7r5 cells, we confirmed that inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) mediates vasopressin (VP)-evoked Ca2<sup>1</sup> release from intracellular stores and showed that types 1 (IP3R1) and 3 (IP3R3) IP3 receptors were expressed. Using antisera selective for IP3R1 or IP3R3 and another that interacted equally well with both subtypes, together with membranes from *Sf*9 cells expressing only single IP3R subtypes to calibrate immunoblotting, we established that A7r5 cells express 81% IP3R1 and 19% IP3R3. To elucidate the contributions of IP3R1 and IP3R3 to Ca2<sup>1</sup> signaling and proliferation, stable clones expressing promoter-inducible antisense cDNA fragments (290 to 19) corresponding to the two IP3R subtypes were selected. Mild inhibition of IP3R1 (7168% of control level) slightly attenuated the IP3-evoked Ca2<sup>1</sup> release (IICR) induced by VP but significantly decreased the subsequent capacitative Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry (CCE) and proliferation. Moderate inhibition (3466%) strongly decreased both IICR and CCE and further blocked proliferation. Complete inhibition almost abolished IICR and CCE and arrested proliferation entirely. Complete inhibition of IP3R3 expression slightly attenuated IICR without affecting CCE or proliferation. In cells microinjected with a low dose of heparin, VP-induced CCE was more susceptible than IICR to mild inhibition of both IP3R1 and IP3R3. A high dose of heparin had a similar effect to complete inhibition of IP3R1 expression: it blocked VP-evoked IICR entirely and CCE by 90%. We conclude that IP3R1, but not IP3R3, is crucial for IICR, CCE, and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells. **(***Circ Res***. 2001;88:202-209.)**

**Key Words:** inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors n IP3-induced Ca2<sup>1</sup> release n capacitative Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry n proliferation n vascular smooth muscle cell

I n most cell types, hormones, neurotransmitters, or growth factors stimulate membrane receptors and activate phospholipase C, which catalyzes the production of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3).1 IP3 is a well-known second messenger mediating IP3-induced Ca2<sup>1</sup> release (IICR) from the intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> ([Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i) stores by binding to IP3 receptors (IP3Rs). IICR produces an initial [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i spike and induces the subsequent capacitative Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry (CCE).1,2 The [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signaling mediated by IICR is versatile, almost ubiquitous, and essential in regulating fertilization,3 development,4 differentiation,5 cell proliferation,5–7 and cell death.8,9 In mammalian cells, at least three IP3R genes (IP3R1, IP3R2, and IP3R3) have been identified encoding proteins with up to 70% amino acid similarity.2 Almost all tissues and cell lines express all three IP3R subtypes to varying degrees, but IP3R1 is most

ubiquitously expressed.2,10,11 Most IP3Rs are found in the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum, but they may also reside in the plasma membrane and nucleus.1,2

Regarding function, IP3R1 has been most elucidated in the central nervous system where IP3R1 is the predominant subtype.2 The majority of homozygous knockout mice lacking the IP3R1 died in utero; those that survived had severe behavioral abnormalities in the form of ataxia and epileptic seizures.12 IP3R1 is essential for the development of nerve growth cones in cultured neurons and for the proliferation of neuroblasts and differentiation of imaginal progenitor cells in *Drosophila*. 5,7 The function of IP3R2 has not been clearly delineated, despite its predominance in liver and heart,11 although in pancreatic islets it may contribute to insulin excretion.13 In bronchial mucosa, IP3R3 may be part of a mechanism coping with oxidative stress.14

From the Human Genome Center (Yuepeng Wang, H.H., Y.S.), the Department of Molecular Neurobiology (K.M.), Institute of Medical Science, the Second Department of Internal Medicine (J.C., Yue Wang, Y.H., M.O.), the Health Service Center (T.T.), University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Pharmacology (C.W.T.), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Correspondence to Yuepeng Wang, Laboratory of Functional Genomics, the Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. E-mail srwang-tky@umin.ac.jp

© 2001 American Heart Association, Inc.

*Circulation Research* **is available at http://www.circresaha.org**

Original received July 13, 2000; revision received December 18, 2000; accepted December 19, 2000.

In the vascular system, we detected only IP3R1 in endothelial cells and both IP3R1 and IP3R3 in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs).15,16 In endothelial cells, IP3R1 is essential for [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signaling, because ATP- or bradykinin-induced IICR and the subsequent CCE can be inhibited by microinjection of antibody or expression of antisense against IP3R1. 15,16 In VSMCs, the contributions of IP3R1 and IP3R3 to Ca2<sup>1</sup> signaling and proliferation are unclear, although in B lymphocytes IP3Rs in the plasma membrane have been implicated in control of apoptosis.8,17 Abnormal proliferation of VSMCs is a pivotal step in the pathogenesis of arteriosclerotic lesions and the formation of restenosis after angioplasty.18,19 In the present study, we quantified the relative levels of expression of IP3R1 and IP3R3 in A7r5 cells and examined the effects on Ca2<sup>1</sup> signaling and cell proliferation of attenuating the expression or function of IP3R1 and/or IP3R3 expression using antisense and heparin. Our results suggest that IP3R1 is more important than IP3R3 for IICR, CCE, and proliferation of VSMCs. CCE is more susceptible than IICR to mild inhibition of IP3R1 and may be responsible for the significantly retarded proliferation of the cells.

# **Materials and Methods**

#### **Cell Culture**

A7r5 cells were grown and passaged in DMEM, as described previously.20

#### **Western Blot**

Total cell lysates were separated by 6% SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with antibodies against each type of IP3R (R1Ab, R2Ab, and R3Ab).16

# **Quantification of Relative Expression of IP3R1 and IP3R3**

Full-length rat IP3R1 and IP3R3 cDNAs were expressed in *Sf*9 cells, and membrane fractions (*Sf*9/IP3R1 and *Sf*9/IP3R3, respectively) were prepared.21 Three antisera (Ab1, Ab3, and AbC) were raised in rabbits using peptides corresponding to the C-terminal of rat IP3R1 ([C]LLGHPPHMNVNPQQPA) and IP3R3 (LGFVDVQNCMSR) and to the N-terminal residues that are similar in all IP3Rs (PMN-RYSAQKQFWKA[C]).21,22 Four identical blots with lanes containing *Sf*9/IP3R1, *Sf*9/IP3R3, and A7r5 cells were probed with the antisera. Using the ratios for *Sf*9/IP3R1 (Ab1:AbC) and *Sf*9/IP3R3 (Ab3:AbC), densitometric measurements of IP3R1 and IP3R3 staining (detected with Ab1 and Ab3) from A7r5 cells were converted into units of AbC staining and quantified.

#### **Construction of Vectors**

A 99-bp fragment (nucleotide position 290 to 19) that shares no homology between IP3R1 and IP3R3 was designed. Total RNA was extracted from A7r5 cells, and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed with primers (IP3R1: 59- CAAGGAGCTGACTACA-39 and 59-GTCAGACATGTCCTTG-39; IP3R3: 59-TTTCCGCCCAGCGCGC-39 and 59-TTCATTCATG-GCTTTG-39). The RT-PCR products were inserted into *p*EGFPC1 (Clontech), and antisense (*p*G.R1AS and *p*G.R3AS) and sense (*p*G.R1S and *p*G.R3S) orientation of the insert was confirmed by sequencing. The RT-PCR products were also inserted into *p*IND (Invitrogen) in antisense (*p*I.R1AS and *p*I.R3AS) and sense (*p*I.R1S and *p*I.R3S) orientation.

#### **Transient and Stable Transfection**

Transient transfection of *p*G.R1AS and *p*G.R3AS was carried out as described previously.16 For stable transfection, cells were cotransfected using a mixture of 3 mg of *p*VgRXR and 3 mg of *p*I.R1AS or *p*I.R3AS and 15 mL of lipofectin per 10-cm-diameter dish. One day after transfection, the medium was changed to DMEM. Two days later, the cells were subcultured in DMEM with 400 mg/mL G418 and 700 mg/mL zeocin. For each construct, 12 to 24 G418/zeocinresistant clones were isolated and passaged. Cells were used for experiments 24 to 72 hours after induction with 5 mg/mL ponasterone A (Invitrogen).

#### **Microinjection**

The amount of heparin (MW55000) microinjected into cells was controlled by varying heparin concentration and injecting pressure.16

# **Measurement of [Ca2**<sup>1</sup>**]i and Mn2**<sup>1</sup> **Influx**

The [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i responses of individual transfected and untransfected cells, as well as heparin-injected and -uninjected cells, in the same observation field, were separately analyzed after stimulation with vasopressin (VP) or thapsigargin (TG). For measurement of the Mn2<sup>1</sup> influx rate, Mn2<sup>1</sup>-induced quenching of fura-2 fluorescence was recorded at an excitation wavelength of 360 nm.16,20

#### **Immunocytostaining**

Cells grown on a CELLocate coverslip (Eppendorf) were fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained with R1Ab or R3Ab.16

#### **RNase Protection Assay**

A 493-bp DNA fragment (nucleotide position 190 to 1403) of rat IP3R1, a 421-bp DNA fragment (1980 to 11400) of rat IP3R2, and a 150-bp DNA fragment (2129 to 121) of rat IP3R3 were ligated to *p*OPRSVI/MCS (Stratagene). The antisense RNA probes, transcribed from plasmids with T7 RNA polymerase, were labeled with biotin. Twenty micrograms of total RNA, isolated from each clone after adding ponasterone A (5 mg/mL) for 72 hours, was hybridized with the probes, followed by detection using an Ambion Biodetect kit.

#### **Cell Count**

At 5% confluence, photomicrographs of cells were taken in a fixed observation field at intervals of 24 hours after ponasterone A (5 mg/mL) treatment; this was continued for 8 to 9 days.

#### **Statistics**

Results are expressed as mean6SEM. Statistical significance was determined by paired *t* test or by ANOVA.

An expanded Materials and Methods section can be found in an online data supplement available at http://www.circresaha.org.

# **Results**

# **VP-Induced [Ca2**<sup>1</sup>**]i Release and Quantification of Relative Expression Levels of IP3R1 and IP3R3 in A7r5 Cells**

In Ca2<sup>1</sup>-free medium, caffeine (3 to 60 mmol/L) did not evoke a [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal in A7r5 cells, but the cells did respond strongly to VP (3 mmol/L) (Figure 1A). Ryanodine (10 to 60 mmol/L) neither directly evoked a [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal nor did it affect the very small response evoked by caffeine (Figure 1B). Immunoblotting showed that R1Ab and R3Ab each reacted with a single 260-kDa band in A7r5 cells (Figure 1C). These results suggest that the release of Ca2<sup>1</sup> from intracellular stores evoked by VP is likely to be mediated by IP3R1 and IP3R3 but not by ryanodine receptors. Previous studies have similarly concluded that ryanodine receptors do not contribute to Ca2<sup>1</sup> signaling in A7r5 cells23 and that IP3 receptors are required for VP-evoked Ca2<sup>1</sup> mobilization.24

**Figure 1.** IICR and quantitative analysis of the expression levels of IP3R1 and IP3R3 in A7r5 cells. A, [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i responses to 30 mmol/L caffeine in [Ca21]o-free medium, with or without subsequent addition of VP (3 mmol/L). B, In Ca2<sup>1</sup>-free medium, neither caffeine (60 mmol/L), nor ryanodine (10 mmol/L), nor caffeine after ryanodine caused a significant increase in [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i . The results (A and B) are typical of those from 3 experiments. C, Total lysates (15 mg) of cultured A7r5 cells (1, 3, and 5), bovine aortic endothelial cells (2), Chinese hamster ovary cells (4), and COS cells (6) were electrophoresed on 6% SDS-PAGE. The pairs of lanes were then immunoblotted with R1Ab (1 and 2) R2Ab (3 and 4), and R3Ab (5 and 6). D, Lanes were loaded with 400 mg of membranes prepared from A7r5 cells (7 and 8) or 1 mg (9), 2 mg (10), or 4 mg (11) of *Sf*9/IP3R1 (a and b) or *Sf*9/IP3R3 (c and d) membranes. Lane 12 was loaded with 2 mg of *Sf*9/ IP3R3 (a and b) or 1 mg of *Sf*9/IP3R1 (c and d). The blots were probed with the indicated antisera (Ab1, Ab3, and AbC). The results shown are typical of 4 experiments.

Next, the relative expression levels of IP3R1 and IP3R3 protein were quantified. As shown in Figure 1D, four parallel blots loaded with a range of concentrations of membranes from *Sf*9/IP3R1, *Sf*9/IP3R3, and A7r5 cells, were immunoblotted with Ab1, Ab3, or AbC. There was a linear relationship between the quantity of membranes loaded and the densitometric measurements of IP3R bands obtained with each antiserum. The ratio of the immunostaining obtained using the subtype-selective and common antisera was 1.4160.20 for *Sf*9/IP3R1 (Ab1:AbC) and 1.5660.21 for *Sf*9/IP3R3 (Ab3:AbC). These ratios together with the parallel measurements of immunostaining from A7r5 cells indicated that A7r5 cells express 80.162.6% IP3R1 and 19.262.3% IP3R3, consistent with previous estimates of relative mRNA levels.11

**Figure 2.** 2D images of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i responses, IP3R1 or IP3R3 expression, and [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i dynamics induced by VP (3 mmol/L, arrows) in transient transfectants of *p*G.R1AS (A and F), *p*G.R1S (B and G), *p*EGFPC1 (C and G), *p*G.R3AS (D and H), or *p*G.R3S (E and I) in [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o-free medium. A through E, Transfectants expressing reporter EGFP (a), fura-2–loaded cells (b), peak [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i response (c), and the immunocytostaining (d) of IP3R1 (A through C) or IP3R3 (D and E). F through I, [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i dynamics in typical single cells.

# **IICR and Ca2**<sup>1</sup> **Entry After Inhibition of IP3R1 or IP3R3**

In the cells ('10%) successfully transiently transfected with *p*G.R1AS, 16% showed substantial inhibition of IP3R1 expression by immunocytostaining (Figure 2A). The average [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i in unstimulated cells was 14868 nmol/L. In medium without extracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> ([Ca21]o), the peak [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal evoked by VP in untransfected cells was 587618 nmol/L, but it was consistently almost abolished in the cells where transfection with *p*G.R1AS had substantially inhibited IP3R1 expression (18066 nmol/L, n57; Figure 2F). The sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i response in the presence of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o was also inhibited (data not shown). These results are similar to those obtained from endothelial cells.16 In contrast, although 13% of the cells successfully transfected with *p*G.R3AS showed marked inhibition of IP3R3 expression (Figure 2D), the responses of these cells to VP in [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o-free medium were only slightly reduced (523616 nmol/L, n59; Figure 2H) and there was no detectable inhibition of the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i response (data not shown). Normal staining for IP3 receptors and normal IICR responses occurred in all transfectants with *p*EGFPC1 (584619 nmol/L, n510; Figures 2C and 2G), *p*G.R1S (590620 nmol/L, n514; Figures 2B and 2G), and *p*G.R3S (601623 nmol/L, n511; Figures 2E and 2I). These results suggest that IP3R1 may be more important than IP3R3 for IICR and Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry in A7r5 cells.

By using promoter-inducible antisense in stable clones, the inhibition of expression of IP3R subtypes could be both graded and more complete. The extent to which IP3R protein levels were reduced could be classified, according to the results of densitometric measurements of Western blots, into mild (50% to 90% remaining), moderate (10% to 49%), and complete (,10%). The amount of IP3R1 protein was mildly decreased to 7168% in four clones, moderately decreased to 3466% in four clones, and abolished (0.860.4%) in three of the 24 clones of *p*I.R1AS, compared with the amount of IP3R1 in 12 clones of *p*I.R1S (Figure 3). In the *p*I.R3AS clones, the amount of IP3R3 protein was mildly decreased to 7467% in three clones, moderately decreased to 3065% in three clones, and abolished (2.762.7%) in three of the 18 clones, compared with the amount of IP3R3 in 12 clones of *p*I.R3S. For both IP3R1 and IP3R3, the results from Western blotting were consistent with those from measurements of mRNA (Figure 3). No compensatory increases in mRNA or the amounts of IP3R1 or IP3R3 protein were found in clones of *p*I.R3AS or *p*I.R1AS, nor was novel transcription or expression of IP3R2 detected.

To evaluate the effects of graded inhibitions of IP3R expression on IICR, responses to VP were measured in [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o-free medium (Figure 4). Clones with mild inhibition of IP3R1 expression exhibited a slight attenuation of IICR (51067 nmol/L, n54) compared with clones of *p*I.R1S (549610 nmol/L, n512). After moderate inhibition of IP3R1 expression, IICR was markedly decreased (32367 nmol/L, n54), and it was almost abolished (19665 nmol/L, n53) in the clones with nearly complete inhibition of IP3R1 expression. In contrast, three clones with moderately inhibited IP3R3 expression demonstrated normal IICR (56466 nmol/L), and even after expression was completely inhibited, there was only a slight decrease in IICR (52667 nmol/L, n53), compared with clones of *p*I.R3S (559611 nmol/L, n512; *P*.0.05). Microinjection of a low concentration of heparin (pipette concentration 50 mg/mL, injection pressure 20 mm H20), to inhibit IP3 binding to all IP3R subtypes, reduced IICR (400631 nmol/L, n56) relative to vehicle-injected cells (591624 nmol/L, n56) (Figure 5). This response was similar to that in clones with a mild or moderate reduction of IP3R1 expression (Figure 4). A high concentration of heparin (200 mg/mL, 80 mm H2O) completely inhibited IICR (15464 nmol/L, n57; Figure 5), an effect that was indistinguishable

**Figure 3.** RNase protection assay (left) and Western blot (right) in clones transfected with *p*I.R1AS, *p*I.R1S, *p*I.R3AS, and *p*I.R3S. Lanes 1 through 9, Levels of expression of IP3R1, IP3R3, and IP3R2 in the *p*I.R1AS-transfected clones R1AS1, R1AS4, R1AS6, R1AS8, R1AS11, R1AS16, R1AS12, R1AS15, and R1AS17, respectively. Lanes 10 through 18, Changes in IP3R1 in *p*I.R1S–transfected clones R1S1, R1S3, R1S6, R1S7, R1S9, R1S12, R1S4, R1S10, and R1S11, respectively. Lanes 19 through 24, Levels of expression of IP3R1, IP3R3, and IP3R2 in the *p*I.R3AS–transfected clones R3AS3, R3AS4, R3AS5, R3AS7, R3AS10, and R3AS14, respectively. Lanes 25 through 30, Changes in IP3R3 in *p*I.R1AS– transfected clones R3S1, R3S2, R3S3, R3S4, R3S6, and R3S9, respectively. The density values for the protein bands in the right panel are as follows: lanes 1 through 9, IP3R1 bands: 8.8, 15.1, 11.6, 25.3, 0.0, 34.7, 6.0, 17.7, and 0.3, respectively; for the IP3R3 bands, the average from all 9 lanes was 8.160.6. Lanes 10 through 18, Average value (IP3R1) was 29.161.9; lanes 19 through 24, IP3R3 bands: 0.7, 8.8, 0.0, 5.2, 0.0, and 1.8, respectively; for the IP3R1 bands, the average from all 6 lanes was 33.561.6; and lanes 25 through 30, average value (IP3R3) was 8.760.7.

from that observed in transient transfectants with substantial loss of IP3R1 expression (Figure 2) or stable clones with complete loss of IP3R1 expression (Figure 4).

To evaluate the effects of graded reductions of IP3R expression on Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry across the plasma membrane, VP-evoked Ca2<sup>1</sup> signals were measured in the presence of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o (Figure 6). Four clones with mildly inhibited IP3R1 expression showed only slight decreases in the amplitude of the initial [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i spike (540617 nmol/L), compared with clones of *p*I.R1S (576620 nmol/L, n512; *P*.0.05). Surprisingly, there was a significant decrease in the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal in these cells (22864 nmol/L at 210 seconds after stimulation) compared with clones of *p*I.R1S (345611 nmol/L, *P*,0.05). Previous studies of A7r5 cells established that VP stimulated both CCE and a second Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry pathway that was activated by arachidonic acid; activation of only the former required depletion of the IP3-sensitive stores, and only it was permeable to Mn2<sup>1</sup>. <sup>24</sup> The decreased Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry in cells with fewer IP3 receptors suggests the involve-

**Figure 4.** [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i responses evoked by VP (3 mmol/L, arrows) in [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o-free medium in clones of *p*I.R1AS (A and B) and *p*I.R3AS (C). Results are typical of 3 experiments.

ment of CCE; this was examined directly by measuring VP-evoked Mn2<sup>1</sup> quench of fura-2 fluorescence. The results demonstrate that fluorescence quenching in the cells with mildly inhibited IP3R1 expression was significantly reduced (1663% at 210 seconds after stimulation), compared with

**Figure 5.** 2D images of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i responses and [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i dynamics evoked by VP (3 mmol/L, arrows) in cells injected with low (A and D) or high (B and E) doses of heparin or vehicle (C and F) in [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o-free medium. A through C, Positions of the injected cells (\* in a), fura-2–loaded cells (b), and peak [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i responses (c). D through F, Time courses of the [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signals.

**Figure 6.** Sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signals (A through C) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (0.5 mmol/L [D through F]) evoked by VP (3 mmol/L, arrows) in clones of *p*I.R1AS (A, B, E, and F) and *p*I.R3AS (C and G) and heparin-injected cells (D and H). The responses were recorded in the presence of 1 mmol/L [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o and are typical of those recorded from 3 experiments.

clones of *p*I.R1S (4363%, *P*,0.05). Four clones with moderate loss of IP3R1 expression revealed an additional decrease in the sustained phase of the VP-evoked [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal (21864 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> quenching (1362%), and in three clones with complete loss of expression, there was an almost complete disappearance of the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i phase (20764 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (1063%).

In contrast, three clones with moderately inhibited IP3R3 expression demonstrated no changes in the VP-evoked sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i phase (36066 nmol/L) or Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (3963%), and in three clones with complete loss of IP3R3 expression, there were insignificant decreases in the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i phase (35868 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (4162%), compared with clones of *p*I.R3S (364610 nmol/L, 4163%, n512). Cells injected with a low dose of heparin exhibited no marked change in the initial VP-evoked [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i spike, but a significant decrease in the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i phase (19967 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (1163%, n516), compared with vehicle-injected cells (33668 nmol/L, 3863%, n514; *P*,0.05). These findings were similar to those from clones with mild inhibition of IP3R1. A high dose of heparin further inhibited the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i phase (16163 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (661%, n517), results that were indistinguishable from those in the clones with complete inhibition of IP3R1.

**Figure 7.** Sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signals (A through C) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry (0.28 mmol/L [D through F]) evoked by TG (1 mmol/L, arrows) in clones of *p*I.R1AS (A and D) and *p*I.R3AS (B and E) and heparininjected cells (C and F). The responses were recorded in the presence of 1 mmol/L [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]o and are typical of those recorded from 3 experiments.

**Figure 8.** Cell proliferation in clones of *p*I.R1AS (A) and *p*I.R3AS (B).

TG-induced CCE was also measured (Figure 7). In clones with mild, moderate, or complete inhibition of IP3R1 expression, there was only very modest attenuation of both the sustained phase of the TG-evoked [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal (34364, 33065, and 32064 nmol/L, respectively, at 15 minutes after stimulation; n53 to 4) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> quenching (2862%, 2863%, and 2462%, respectively, at 15 minutes after stimulation), compared with clones of *p*G.R1S (38668 nmol/L, 3165%, n511; *P*,0.05). In three clones with complete inhibition of IP3R3 expression, the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal (40968 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> quenching (3463%) were similar to those in *p*I.R3S clones (423610 nmol/L, 3363%, n512). A low dose of heparin attenuated the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal (38667 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> quenching (2863%, n511), compared with vehicle-injected cells (43566 nmol/L, 3563%, n59; *P*,0.05). A high dose of heparin further reduced the sustained [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signal (34164 nmol/L) and Mn2<sup>1</sup> quenching (2463%, n521). These results suggest that in A7r5 cells, IP3R1 is more important than IP3R3 for IICR, that there is a graded IICR response based on the extent of IP3R1 inhibition, and that VP-evoked CCE is more susceptible than IICR to mild inhibition of IP3R1.

# **Cell Proliferation After Inhibition of IP3R1 or IP3R3 Expression**

For each clone, cell proliferation was monitored by serial photomicrographs (Figure 8). In four clones with mildly reduced IP3R1 expression, proliferation was retarded (369623 cells per observation field on day 8), compared with *p*I.R1S clones (825625 cells per field, n512, *P*,0.05). Four clones with moderate inhibition revealed markedly decreased proliferation (157617 cells per field; *P*,0.05 versus pI.R1S clones). In three clones with complete loss of IP3R1 expression, proliferation was arrested (4663 cells per field). In contrast, clones with moderate or complete loss of IP3R3 expression showed, respectively, proliferation rates of 698639 (n53) and 687633 (n53) cells per field on day 8, which are not significantly different from that of *p*I.R3S clones (723637 cells per field, n512).

# **Discussion**

In mammalian cells, where all three IP3R subtypes are often expressed and then assembled into homotetrameric and heterotetrameric Ca2<sup>1</sup> channels, it has proved difficult to disentangle the contributions of each IP3R subtype to the different patterns of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signaling.2,22,25 Several studies reported that blocking expression of one IP3R subtype did not significantly change the expression of the remaining subtypes.12,26,27 After inhibition of one or two IP3R subtypes, the remaining subtype(s), at least if expressed at a sufficient level, are often able to functionally compensate in mediating IICR and proliferation, suggesting a degree of functional redundancy.5–7,12,25–27 In Jurkat T cells, which express largely IP3R1 with only small amounts of IP3R2 and IP3R3, <sup>8</sup> elimination of IP3R1 by antisense abolished IICR and arrested proliferation.6,8 In contrast, mouse T cells express similar amounts of all three IP3R subtypes, and T cells isolated from IP3R1 –/– mice demonstrated normal IICR and proliferation.26 In avian B cells, IP3R1 and IP3R2 predominate,25 but abolishing expression of one or two subtypes was accompanied by an increased expression of the remaining subtype(s). Thus, IICR appeared normal after deleting only one IP3R subtype, was attenuated markedly after deleting both IP3R1 and IP3R2, and was abolished when all three IP3R subtypes were deleted.27 Chromophore-assisted laser inactivation of IP3R1 resulted in growth arrest in neurons, where almost all IP3R are type 1.7 In vivo, neonatal IP3R1 –/– mice at a low birthrate showed a 50% decrease in body weight and died at weaning.12 In *Drosophila*, which has only one IP3R subtype similar to IP3R1, knockout of the gene caused fatal damage or extraordinary retardation of growth.5

In the present study, there were no compensatory increases in the expression of the remaining types of IP3R in the stable clones lacking either IP3R1 or IP3R3. In some clones, there was no detectable IP3R1 or IP3R3 mRNA, suggesting that it was degraded, presumably by ribozyme activity in the complex of endogenous IP3R1 or IP3R3 mRNA with antisense mRNA. Cells completely lacking IP3R1 showed no IICR, nor did they proliferate. In cells with moderately inhibited IP3R1 expression, the retarded proliferation was similar to that reported in Jurkat T cells.6 Even complete inhibition of IP3R3 expression only slightly attenuated IICR and had no effect on proliferation. These results suggest that the 19% of IP3R that are type 3 could not alone trigger IICR and proliferation. However, the 81% of IP3R that are type 1 could compensate for the lack of IP3R3 and trigger most of the proliferation and the IICR evoked by maximal stimulation with VP. These results are similar to those from B cells.27

In addition to their levels of expression, the relative affinities of the IP3R subtypes for IP3 will also affect their contributions to [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i signaling. IP3R1 and IP3R3 have been reported to differ in their relative affinities, with most,10 although not all,21 studies suggesting that IP3R1 has greater affinity for IP3. IP3Rs are also regulated by [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i, which contributes to the oscillatory patterns of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i release21,25 required for maintaining vascular tone after sympathetic stimulation.28 Although the issue remains contentious,29 it seems likely that IP3R1 and IP3R3 are each biphasically regulated by [Ca21]i, however with different [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i sensitivities and possibly different mechanisms that may also contribute to the relative importance of the IP3R subtypes in mediating physiological responses.21,22

Ca2<sup>1</sup> influx mediated by various Ca2<sup>1</sup> channels including CCE channels is crucial for proliferation of VSMCs.30,31 We and others have demonstrated that blocking Ca2<sup>1</sup> influx through L-type Ca2<sup>1</sup> channels by verapamil or nifedipine inhibited proliferation of A7r5 cells by 22% to 61%.31,32 Blocking Ca2<sup>1</sup> influx through the growth factor–regulated Ca2<sup>1</sup> channel33 by inhibiting channel expression blocked proliferation by 40% (personal communication, I. Kojima, 1999). In cells completely lacking IP3R1, VP could no longer empty the Ca2<sup>1</sup> stores and was therefore unable to stimulate CCE. However, in cells with mild inhibition of IP3R1, VP-induced IICR was almost normal, yet CCE was significantly inhibited. These results indicating that CCE is more susceptible to inhibition of IP3R1 expression than IICR are consistent with recent work in rat basophilic leukemia cells in which CCE was activated only after substantial depletion of the intracellular stores.34,35 In both A7r5 cells with mild inhibition of IP3R and rat basophilic leukemia cells stimulated with low levels of IP3, substantial IICR was induced without any activation of CCE,35 because the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2<sup>1</sup>-ATPase may be able to effectively counteract the IP3-evoked [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i leak and so prevent the stores from emptying to a level at which they activate CCE.34

In contrast, VP-induced CCE was not decreased in cells lacking IP3R3: IICR was only slightly inhibited, and CCE was barely affected. Our results therefore exclude an essential role for IP3R3 in regulating CCE8 and establish that IP3R1 are more important than IP3R3 in controlling IICR, CCE, and proliferation in VSMCs. VP still evoked a very small [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i rise (192 to 206 nmol/L) after complete inhibition of IP3R1 and/or IP3R3. This [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i rise may result from Ca2<sup>1</sup> influx through the noncapacitative pathway,24 which may help maintain cell viability, without being sufficient for proliferation.

Compared with the substantial inhibition of VP-evoked Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry in cells with mild loss of IP3R1, by either IP3R1AS or heparin36 (Figure 6), the TG-evoked [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i rise and Mn2<sup>1</sup> entry were attenuated only slightly, even in cells with complete loss of IP3R1. These results therefore suggest that although we cannot wholly eliminate a role for IP3R in coupling depletion of [Ca2<sup>1</sup>]i stores to CCE,37,38 the major effect of IP3 receptor inhibition in A7r5 cells is to prevent IP3 from emptying the stores and consequently inhibits CCE.

VSMCs also coexpress IP3R1 and IP3R3 in vivo and the relative amounts, as shown by the amounts of mRNA, may change with age.39 In rat, IP3R1 is the minor subtype in neonates, but the major subtype in adults,19 whereas the reverse is true for IP3R3. 39,40 Our group observed that expression of IP3R1, but not IP3R3, increased in VSMCs of adult human arteriosclerotic plaques and in the rat carotid artery neointima after balloon injury (authors' unpublished data). Increased IP3R1 expression may therefore be involved in hypertension and arteriosclerosis. Because complete inhibition of IP3R1 expression is likely to be detrimental,7,12 but mild inhibition is effective in blocking VSMC proliferation, our results are of potential application in blocking VSMC proliferation, especially in restenosis after coronary artery angioplasty,18 by mild inhibition of IP3R1 expression.

# **Acknowledgments**

This study was supported by the Research Foundation of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, the Honjo International Scholarship Foundation, the Japanese-Chinese Medical Research Collaboration Foundation, and the Wellcome Trust.

# **References**

- 1. Berridge MJ. Inositol trisphosphate and calcium signalling. *Nature*. 1993; 361:315–325.
- 2. Taylor CW, Genazzani S, Morris SA. Expression of inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate receptors. *Cell Calcium*. 1999;26:237–251.
- 3. Kume S, Muto A, Aruga J, Nakagawa T, Michikawa T, Furuichi T, Nakade S, Okano H, Mikoshiba K. The *Xenopus* IP3 receptor: structure, function, and localization in oocytes and eggs. *Cell*. 1993;73:555–570.
- 4. Kume S, Muto A, Inoue T, Suga K, Okano H, Mikoshiba K. Role of 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in ventral signaling in *Xenopus* embryos. *Science*. 1997;278:1940–1943.
- 5. Jairaj K, Jalink K, Hardy RW, Hartenstein V, Zuker CS. InsP3 receptor is essential for growth and differentiation but not for vision in *Drosophila*. *Neuron*. 1997;18:881–887.
- 6. Jayaraman T, Ondriasova E, Ondrias K, Harnick DJ, Marks AR. The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is essential for T-cell receptor signaling. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1995;92:6007–6011.
- 7. Takei K, Shin YM, Inoue T, Kato K, Mikoshiba K. Regulation of nerve growth mediated by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in growth cones. *Science*. 1998;282:1705–1708.
- 8. Jayaraman T, Marks AR. T cells deficient in inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor are resistant to apoptosis. *Mol Cell Biol*. 1997;17:3005–3012.
- 9. Khan AA, Soloski MJ, Sharp AH, Schilling G, Sabatini DM, Li SH, Ross CA, Synder SH. Lymphocyte apoptosis: mediated by increased type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. *Science*. 1996;273:503–507.
- 10. Newton CL, Mignery GA, Sudhof TC. Co-expression in vertebrate tissues and cell lines of multiple inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) receptors with distinct affinities for InsP3. *J Biol Chem*. 1994;269:28613–28619.
- 11. Smedt HD, Missiaen L, Parys JB, Bootman MD, Mertens L, Bosch LVD, Casteels R. Determination of relative amounts of inositol trisphosphate receptor mRNA isoforms by ratio polymerase chain reaction. *J Biol Chem*. 1994;269:21691–21698.
- 12. Matsumoto M, Nakagawa T, Inoue T, Nagata E, Tanaka K, Takano H, Minowa O, Kuno J, Sakakibara S, Yamada M, Yoneshima H, Miyawaki A, Fukuuchi Y, Furuichi T, Okano H, Mikoshiba K, Noda T. Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type-1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. *Nature*. 1996;379:168–171.
- 13. Lee B, Jonas JC, Weir GC, Laychock SG. Glucose regulates expression of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor isoforms in isolated rat pancreatic islets. *Endocrinology*. 1999;140:2173–2182.
- 14. Missiaen L, Parys JB, Sienaert I, Maes K, Kunzelmann K, Takahashi M, Tanzawa K, Smedt HD. Functional properties of the type-3 InsP3 receptor in 16HBE14o-bronchial mucosal cells. *J Biol Chem*. 1998;273: 8983–8986.
- 15. Wang YP, Chen J, Shin WS, Kawaguchi H, Inukai M, Toyo-oka T. Microinjection of specific antibody to the C-terminal domain of IP3 receptor temporarily inhibits both ATP-induced intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> release from intracellular store and Ca2<sup>1</sup> influx in endothelial cells. *Circulation*. 1996;94(suppl I):I-713. Abstract.
- 16. Chen J, Wang YP, Wang Y, Nakajima T, Iwasawa K, Hikiji H, Sunamoto M, Choi DK, Yoshida Y, Sakaki Y, Toyo-oka T. Autocrine action and its underlying mechanism of nitric oxide on intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> homeostasis in vascular endothelial cells. *J Biol Chem*. 2000;275:28739–28749.
- 17. Putney JW Jr. Type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor and capacitative calcium entry. *Cell Calcium*. 1997;21:257–261.
- 18. Ross R. The pathogenesis of atherosclerosis: a perspective for the 1990s. *Nature*. 1993;362:801–809.
- 19. Marks AR. Calcium channels expressed in vascular smooth muscle. *Circulation*. 1992;86(suppl III):III-61–III-67.
- 20. Wang YP, Shin WS, Kawaguchi H, Inukai M, Kato M, Sakamoto A, Uehara Y, Miyamoto M, Shimamoto N, Korenaga R, Ando J, Toyo-oka T. Contribution of sustained Ca2<sup>1</sup> elevation for nitric oxide production in endothelial cells and subsequent modulation of Ca2<sup>1</sup> transient in vascular smooth muscle cells in coculture. *J Biol Chem*. 1996;271:5647–5655.
- 21. Cardy TJA, Traynor D, Taylor CW. Differential regulation of type-1 and -3 inositol trisphosphate receptors by cytosolic Ca2<sup>1</sup>. *Biochem J*. 1997; 328:785–793.
- 22. Swatton JE, Morris SA, Cardy TJ, Taylor CW. Type 3 inositol trisphosphate receptors in RINm5F cells are biphasically regulated by cytosolic Ca2<sup>1</sup> and mediate quantal Ca2<sup>1</sup> mobilization. *Biochem J*. 1999; 344:55–60.
- 23. Byron KL, Taylor CW. Spontaneous Ca2<sup>1</sup> spiking in a vascular smooth muscle cell line is independent of the release of intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> stores. *J Biol Chem*. 1993;268:6945–6952.
- 24. Broad LM, Cannon TR, Taylor CW. A non-capacitative pathway activated by arachidonic acid is the major Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry mechanism in rat A7r5 smooth muscle cells stimulated with low concentrations of vasopressin. *J Physiol*. 1999;517:121–134.
- 25. Miyakawa T, Maeda A, Yamazawa T, Hirose K, Kurosaki T, Iino M. Encoding of Ca2<sup>1</sup> signals by differential expression of IP3 receptor subtypes. *EMBO J*. 1999;18:1303–1308.
- 26. Hirota J, Baba M, Matsumoto M, Furuichi T, Takatsu K, Mikoshiba K. T-cell-receptor signalling in inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) type-1-deficient mice: is IP3R type-1 essential for T-cell-receptor signalling? *Biochem J*. 1997;333:615–619.
- 27. Sugawara H, Kurosaki M, Taketa M, Kurosaki T. Genetic evidence for involvement of type 1, type 2 and type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in signal transduction through the B-cell antigen receptor. *EMBO J*. 1997;16:3078–3088.
- 28. Iino M, Kasai H, Yamazawa T. Visualization of neural control of intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> concentration in single vascular smooth muscle cells in situ. *EMBO J*. 1994;13:5026–5031.
- 29. Hagar RE, Burgstahler AD, Nathanson MH, Ehrlich BE. Type III InsP3 receptor channel stays open in the presence of increased calcium. *Nature*. 1998;396:81–84.
- 30. Golovin VA. Cell proliferation is associated with enhanced capacitative Ca2<sup>1</sup> entry in human arterial myocytes. *Am J Physiol*. 1999;277: C343–C349.
- 31. Sperti G, Colucci WS. Calcium influx modulates DNA synthesis and proliferation in A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells. *Eur J Pharmacol*. 1991;206:279–284.
- 32. Asano M, Nakajima T, Iwasawa K, Asakura Y, Morita T, Nakamura F, Tomaru T, Wang Y, Goto A, Toyo-oka T, Soma M, Suzuki S, Okuda Y. Eicosapentaenoic acid inhibits vasopressin-activated Ca2<sup>1</sup> influx and cell proliferation in rat aortic smooth muscle cell lines. *Eur J Pharmacol*. 1999;379:199–209.
- 33. Kanzaki M, Zhang YQ, Mashima H, Li L, Shibata H, Kojima I. Translocation of a calcium-permeable cation channel induced by insulin-like growth factor-I. *Nat Cell Biol*. 1999;1:165–170.
- 34. Fierro L, Parekh AB. Substantial depletion of the intracellular Ca2<sup>1</sup> stores is required for macroscopic activation of the Ca2<sup>1</sup> release-activated Ca2<sup>1</sup> current in rat basophilic leukaemia cells. *J Physiol*. 2000;522:247–257.
- 35. Parekh AB, Fleig A, Penner R. The store-operated calcium current I (CRAC): nonlinear activation by InsP3 and dissociation from calcium release. *Cell*. 1997;89:973–980.
- 36. Smith PM, Gallacher DV. Thapsigargin-induced Ca2<sup>1</sup> mobilization in acutely isolated mouse lacrimal acinar cells is dependent on a basal level of Ins(1,4,5)P3 and is inhibited by heparin. *Biochem J*. 1994;299:37–40.
- 37. Kiselyov K, Xu X, Mozhayeva G, Kuo T, Pessah I, Mignery G, Zhu X, Birnbaumer L, Muallem S. Functional interaction between InsP3 receptors and store-operated Htrp3 channels. *Nature*. 1998;396:478–482.
- 38. Ma HT, Patterson RL, van Rossum DB, Birnbaumer L, Mikoshiba K, Gill DL. Requirement of the inositol trisphosphate receptor for activation of store-operated Ca2<sup>1</sup> channels. *Science*. 2000;287:1647–1651.
- 39. Tasker PN, Michelangeli F, Nixon GF. Expression and distribution of the type 1 and type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in developing vascular smooth muscle. *Circ Res*. 1999;84:536–542.
- 40. Tasker PN, Taylor CW, Nixon GF. Expression and distribution of InsP3 receptor subtypes in proliferating vascular smooth muscle cells. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun*. 2000;273:907–912.