- 7. Niemeyer, B. A., Suzuki, E., Scott, K., Jalink, K. & Zuker, C. S. The Drosophila light-activated conductance is composed of the two channels TRP and TRPL. Cell 85, 651±659 (1996).
- 8. Reuss, H., Mojet, M. H., Chyb, S. & Hardie, R. C. In vivo analysis of the Drosophila light-sensitive channels, TRP and TRPL. Neuron 19, 1249±1259 (1997).
- 9. Petersen, C. C. H., Berridge, M. J., Borgese, M. F. & Bennett, D. L. Putative capacitative calcium entry channels: expression of Drosophila trp and evidence for the existence of vertebrate homologues. Biochem. J. 311, 41±44 (1995).
- 10. Wes, P. D. et al. TRPC1, a human homolog of a Drosophila store-operated channel. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 9652±9656 (1995).
- 11. Birnbaumer, L.et al. On the molecular basis and regulation of cellular capacitative calcium entry: roles for Trp proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 15195±15202 (1996).
- 12. Smith, D. P. et al. Photoreceptor deactivation and retinal degeneration mediated by a photoreceptorspeci®c protein-kinase-C. Science 254, 1478±1484 (1991).
- 13. Hardie, R. C. et al. Protein kinase C is required for light adaptation in Drosophila photoreceptors. Nature 363, 634±637 (1993).
- 14. Yoshioka, T. et al. Evidence that arachidonic acid is de®cient in phosphatidylinositol of Drosophila heads. J. Biochem. 98, 657±662 (1986).
- 15. Stark, W. S., Lin, T. N., Brackhahn, D., Christianson, J. S. & Sun, G. Y. Fatty-acids in the lipids of Drosophila headsÐeffects of visual mutants, carotenoid deprivation and dietary fatty-acids. Lipids 28, 345±350 (1993).
- 16. Meves, H. Modulation of ion channels by arachidonic acid. Prog. Neurobiol. 43, 175±186 (1994).
- 17. Pearn, M. T., Randall, L. L., Shortridge, R. D., Burg, M. G. & Pak, W. L. Molecular, biochemical, and electrophysiological characterization of Drosophila norpA mutants. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 4937±4945 (1996).
- 18. Scott, K., Becker, A., Sun, Y., Hardy, R. & Zuker, C. G(q alpha) protein function in vivo: genetic dissection of its role in photoreceptor cell physiology. Neuron 15, 919±927 (1995).
- 19. Shim, K. et al. Control of Drosophila retinoid and fatty acid binding glycoprotein expression by retinoids and retinoic acid: northern, western and immunocytochemical analyses. Exp. Eye Res. 65, 717±727 (1997).
- 20. Hardie, R. C., Reuss, H., Lansdell, S. J. & Millar, N. S. Functional equivalence of native light-sensitive channels in the Drosophila trp<sup>301</sup> mutant and TRPL cation channels expressed in a stably transfected Drosophila cell line. Cell Calcium 21, 431±440 (1997).
- 21. Karnovsky, M. J., Kleinfeld, A. M., Hoover, R. L. & Klausner, R. D. The concept of lipid domains in membranes. J. Cell Biol. 94, 1±6 (1982).
- 22. Anderson, M. P. & Welsh, M. J. Fatty acids inhibit apical membrane chloride channels in airway epithelia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 87, 7334±7338 (1990).
- 23. Acharya, J. K., Jalink, K., Hardy, R. W., Hartenstein, V. & Zuker, C. S. InsP3 receptor is essential for growth and differentiation but not for vision in Drosophila. Neuron 18, 881±887 (1997).
- 24. Dong, Y., Kunze, D. L., Vaca, L. & Schilling, W. P. Ins(1,4,5)P3 activates Drosophila cation channel Trpl in recombinant baculovirus-infected Sf9 insect cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 269, C1332±C1339 (1995).
- 25. Zimmer, S., Trost, C., Cavalie, A., Philipp, S. & Flockerzi, V. The trpl protein is a Ca2+-calmodulin activated non-selective cation (CAN) channel. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. 355, 238 (1997).
- 26. Obukhov, A. G. et al. Direct activation of trpl cation channels by G alpha11 subunits. EMBO J. 15, 5833±5838 (1996).
- 27. Van der Zee, L., Nelemans, A. & Den Hertog, A. Arachidonic acid is functioning as a second messenger in activating the Ca2+ entry process on H1-histaminoceptor stimulation in DDT1 MF-2 cells. Biochem. J. 305, 859±864 (1995).
- 28. Shuttleworth, T. J. Arachidonic-acid activates the noncapacitative entry of Ca2+ during [Ca2+]i oscillations. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 21720±21725 (1996).
- 29. Hardie, R. C. Whole-cell recordings of the light-induced current in Drosophila photoreceptors: evidence for feedback by calcium permeating the light sensitive channels. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 245, 203±210 (1991).
- 30. Hardie, R. C. INDO-1 measurements of absolute resting and light-induced Ca2+ concentration in Drosophila photoreceptors. J. Neurosci. 16, 2924±2933 (1996).

Acknowledgements. We thank C. Taylor and Z. Selinger for discussions, and L. Kelly and W. A. Harris for discussions and comments on an earlier version of this paper. The work was supported by the Wellcome Trust and the BBSRC.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.C.H. (e-mail: rch14@hermes. cam.ac.uk).

# Direct activation of human TRPC6 and TRPC3 channels by diacylglycerol

#### Thomas Hofmann, Alexander G. Obukhov, Michael Schaefer, Christian Harteneck, Thomas Gudermann & GuÈnter Schultz

Institut fuÈr Pharmakologie, UniversitaÈtsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie UniversitaÈt Berlin, Thielallee 69-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Eukaryotic cells respond to many hormones and neurotransmitters with increased activity of the enzyme phospholipase C and a subsequent rise in the concentration of intracellular free calcium ([Ca2+]i) 1 . The increase in [Ca2+]i occurs as a result of the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores and an in¯ux of Ca2+ through the plasma membrane2±4; this in¯ux of Ca2+ may5 or may not<sup>6</sup> be storedependent. Drosophila transient receptor potential (TRP) pro-

.........................................................................................................................

teins and some mammalian homologues (TRPC proteins) are thought to mediate capacitative Ca2+ entry7±9. Here we describe the molecular mechanism of store-depletion-independent activation of a subfamily of mammalian TRPC channels. We ®nd that hTRPC6 is a non-selective cation channel that is activated by diacylglycerol in a membrane-delimited fashion, independently of protein kinases C activated by diacylglycerol. Although hTRPC3, the closest structural relative of hTRPC6, is activated in the same way, TRPCs 1, 4 and 5 and the vanilloid receptor subtype 1 are unresponsive to the lipid mediator. Thus, hTRPC3 and hTRPC6 represent the ®rst members of a new functional family of second-messenger-operated cation channels, which are activated by diacylglycerol.

By using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based strategy we cloned hTRPC6, which encodes a protein of the mammalian TRPC family of ion channels. hTRPC6 is a 931-amino-acid protein that shares 93% amino-acid identity with its murine homologue10. Northern blot analysis showed that hTRPC6 is expressed mainly in placenta, lung, spleen, ovary and small intestine (results not shown).

To determine the contribution of hTRPC6 to Ca2+ entry in response to stimulation of a receptor coupled to the G protein Gq/11, we microinjected nuclei of CHO-K1 cells with complementary DNA constructs encoding the H1 histamine receptor (H1R), a Gq/11-coupled receptor, and hTRPC6. The increase in [Ca2+]i that occurred in cells loaded with fura-2, a ¯uorescent sensor of [Ca2+]i, in response to stimulation with histamine was potentiated by hTRPC6 expression (Fig. 1a). Under whole-cell voltage-clamp conditions, H1R/hTRPC6 expressing cells showed large inward currents (mean current 2 2:7 6 0:6 nA at -60 mV; n 21 out of 22 cells studied) in

Figure 1 Functional characterization of hTRPC6. a, Time course of [Ca2+]i in hTRPC6/H1R-expressing (n 12) or H1R-expressing (control; n 12) CHO-K1 cells in response to histamine. b, Currents in H1R/hTRPC6-expressing (®lled squares) and control (dotted line) cells voltage-clamped at -60 mV. Histamine (80 mM), NMDG<sup>+</sup> and Na<sup>+</sup> were present in the bath (solution B1) as indicated. Inset, current traces obtained during voltage ramps from -90 to +90 mV performed at positions 1±3 of the currents. Channel activity is shown as NPo. c, Stimulation of hTRPC6 channels by histamine in a cell-attached patch. Inset, sample recordings obtained at positions 1 and 2 of the graph. d, Current±voltage relationships in inside-out patches of hTRPC6-expressing cells assessed from mean amplitudes at various holding potentials (n 3±7). The pipette solution P1 contained 5 mM histamine. Bath solutions were P1 (open circles) or B2 (®lled circles). Insets show sample traces.

## letters to nature

response to histamine, with a time to peak of 4:6 6 1:3 s (Fig. 1b). The current±voltage (I±V) relation revealed dual inward and outward recti®cation (Fig. 1b, inset). The reversal potential of the hTRPC6 current was 2 3:6 6 0:8 mV (n 21). Control cells did not exhibit histamine-activated conductances (n 10). Inward currents were abolished when N-methyl-D-glucamine (NMDG; solution B4) was the only extracellular cation (n 9). An inward current was also measurable after histamine challenge when K+ was the only extracellular cation (n 4). Thus, fura-2 ¯uorescence and electrophysiological data indicate that hTRPC6 is a non-selective cation channel that is permeable for Ca2+, Cs+ , Na+ and K+ . We assessed relative ionic permeabilities by determining reversal potentials under bi-ionic conditions<sup>11</sup> with Cs+ as the main cation in the pipette (solution P1). The relative permeabilities PCa/PNa and PNa/PCs were 5 and 0.7, respectively. The unitary single-channel amplitude estimated from ¯uctuation analysis was 2 1:5 6 0:1 pA at -60 mV (n 8).

In the cell-attached mode, marked single-channel activity was detected after the addition of histamine to the bath solution (Fig. 1c; n 8). In inside-out patches, single-channel currents with a mean unitary current amplitude of 2 1:7 6 0:1 pA were detected at a holding potential of -60 mV (n 18). No such channel activity was observed in patches from control cells (n 9). In studies of single channels, hTRPC6 exhibited a linear I±V relationship with a calculated slope conductance of 35 pS (duration of events .0.3 ms; reversal potential Erev 0:2 mV) in symmetrical 120 mM Cs+ solutions (solution P1; Fig. 1d). Replacement of the main charge carrier in the bath solution with 120 mM Na<sup>+</sup> (solution B2) resulted in a shift of the reversal potential to 7.4 mVand a slope conductance of 37.5 pS. Under these conditions, the estimated permeability ratio PNa/PCs was 0.75. The open probability for hTRPC6 was higher at positive (+60 mV) than at negative (-60 mV) holding potentials (n 4) (Fig. 1d, inset), and the mean open time was ,1 ms (n 17).

hTRPC6-mediated Ca2+ entry could not be produced by depletion of internal stores by thapsigargin. To determine whether hTRPC6 could be activated by an increase in [Ca2+]i, as reported for hTRPC3 (ref. 12), we added the Ca2+ ionophore ionomycin (1 mM) to hTRPC6-expressing cells. No increase in channel activity was observed (n 8), but subsequent application of histamine induced an increase in single-channel activity (n 6 out of 8). To examine the role of G proteins in regulation of hTRPC6, we dialysed AlF4 - , an activator of heterotrimeric G proteins, into cells expressing hTRPC6 (30mM AlF4 - in pipette solution P1). We detected NMDG-sensitive inward cation currents (Erev 2 1:1 6 0:9 mV) in these cells under whole-cell voltage-clamp conditions (Fig. 2a; mean current 2 530 6 93 pA, holding potential -60 mV, n 27 out of 28); no cation currents could be measured in control cells (n 6). AlF4 - -stimulated currents developed within 65 6 6 s of AlF4 - dialysis (n 6). After stimulation with AlF4 - , the hTRPC6 expressing cells did not show further cation currents in response to histamine (n 3).

A 12-min pretreatment of hTRPC6-expressing cells with 10 mM U73122, an inhibitor of phospholipase C (PLC), abolished the histamine-induced Mn2+ in¯ux in fura-2-loaded cells (Fig. 2b), whereas the biologically inactive analogue U73343 (10mM) had no inhibitory effect. To test for a potential role of inositol-1,4,5 trisphosphate (InsP3, produced from phosphatidylinositol-4,5 bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) by PLC) in hTRPC6 activation, we dialysed InsP3 (100mM in the pipette solution) into H1R/hTRPC6 expressing cells; no currents were produced (n 10) (Fig. 2c). However, these cells responded to subsequent application of histamine.

To assess the role of diacylglycerol (DAG), a second product of PLC activity, as a second messenger in stimulation of hTRPC6, we measured hTRPC6-dependent Mn2+ in¯ux following application of the membrane-permeable DAG analogues 1-oleoyl-2-acetyl-snglycerol (OAG) or 1,2-dioctanoyl-sn-glycerol (DOG) (100mM each). In hTRPC6-expressing cells, both substances elicited an instantaneous in¯ux of Mn2+, whereas control cells were unresponsive (Fig. 2d). Cellular DAG is mainly metabolized by DAG lipase13. We therefore treated hTRPC6-expressing cells with the DAG-lipase inhibitor RHC80267 (50mM), which led to an increase in quenching of fura-2 ¯uorescence by Mn2+ that was accompanied by a prolonged rise in [Ca2+]i (Fig. 2e). Control cells did not respond to the inhibitor. To evaluate the contribution of protein kinase C (PKC) to the effects of DAG, we pretreated hTRPC6-expressing cells either with phorbol-12,13-didecanoate (PDD) or phorbol-12 myristoyl-13-acetate (PMA) at 2mM for 40 h to downregulate PKC isoforms, or with one of two PKC blockers, staurosporine (1 mM) or bisindolylmaleimide I (500 nM), added 30 min before OAG (100 mM) (Fig. 2f). OAG-induced Mn2+ in¯ux remained unaffected by these compounds. An acute challenge of hTRPC6-expressing cells with PDD or PMA (10-<sup>7</sup> to 10-<sup>4</sup> M) failed to evoke rises in

Figure 2 Regulation of hTRPC6. a, AIF4 - -induced hTRPC6 currents in the presence of Na<sup>+</sup> and NMDG+ at -60 mV in the whole-cell mode. Inset, current traces obtained during voltage ramps from -90 to +90 mV at positions 1 and 2 of the main current trace. b, Agonist-induced Mn2+ quenching in H1R/hTRPC6 expressing cells. Cells were pretreated for 12 min with 1,10 mM U73122 (n 18); 2, 0.2% dimethyl sulphoxide (n 12); or 3, 10 mM U73343 (n 18). Percentages shown are per cent quenching of fura-2 ¯uorescence by Mn2+. c, Effect of dialysis of InsP3 (100mM) on histamine-induced hTRPC6 currents. H1R/hTRPC6-expressing cells were voltage-clamped at -60 mV. Inset, current traces obtained during voltage ramps from -90 to +90 mVobtained at positions 1 and 2 of the main current trace. Solution P1 was in the pipette and solution B1 was in the bath. d, Mn2+ in¯ux evoked by membrane-permeable DAG analogues.1, H1R-expressing cells (n 8) stimulated with 100mM OAG; H1R/hTRCP6-expressing cells exposed to 2,100 mM OAG (n 15) or 3, 100 mM DOG (n 15 cells). e, hTRPC6 activation by a DAGlipase inhibitor. RHC80267 (50 mM) was applied to 1, control (n 9) and 2, hTRPC6-expressing (n 14) cells; Mn2+ quenching of fura-2 ¯uorescence was recorded. Inset, time courses of [Ca2+]i in 3, hTRPC6-expressing and 4, control cells. f, Effect of PKC inhibition on OAG-induced Mn2+ quenching. hTRPC6 expressing cells were 1, not treated (n 18), 2, pre-incubated for 40 h with 2 mM PDD (n 14), or 3, exposed to 1 mM staurosporine (n 13) before OAG challenge.

## letters to nature

[Ca2+]i. In whole-cell experiments, pre-incubation with staurosporine or calphostin C (1 mM), a competitive inhibitor of binding of phorbol esters and DAG to PKC isoforms, did not inhibit hTRPC6 activation. Together, these results indicate a PKC-independent effect of diacylglycerols on hTRPC6.

To determine whether hTRPC6 could be activated in a membrane-delimited fashion, we studied the effects of various DAG analogues in inside-out patches. Addition of the membrane-permeable OAG (100 mM) as well as the impermeable, endogenous DAG analogues 1-stearoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol (SAG, 10 mM) and 1-stearoyl-2-linoleoyl-sn-glycerol (SLG, 100 mM) to the bath evoked a marked increase in channel activity (Fig. 3a±c), with SAG (n 18 out of 22) being the most effective (mean increase in NPo, the product of the number of channels (N) and the channel open probability (Po), was ,100-fold). SAG's effect was less at 1 mM (mean increase in NP<sup>o</sup> ,6-fold; n 3 out of 4), and no effect of SAG was detected at 100 nM (n 3 out of 3).

Application of impermeable DAG analogues at the above concentrations to the incubation medium of fura-2-loaded intact hTRPC6-expressing cells did not result in increases in [Ca2+]i (n 6). Exposure of inside-out patches of control cells to 10 mM SAG (n 11) did not reveal channel activation. Patches obtained from cells expressing the rat vanilloid receptor subtype 1 (rVR1)14 failed to respond to SAG but did respond to 10 mM capsaicin with marked channel activity (Fig. 3d). Conversely, capsaicin did not evoke currents in hTRPC6-containing membrane patches (n 5). Addition of 10 mM InsP3 to inside-out patches isolated from hTRPC6-expressing cells con®rmed that this second messenger cannot activate hTRPC6, whereas subsequent SAG application resulted in sustained hTRPC6 activity (n 4) (Fig. 3e). We tested the ability of PtdIns(4,5)P2 (10mM), a direct activator of inward recti®er K+ channels15, to stimulate hTRPC6 (Fig. 3f). PtdIns(4,5)P2 had no effect on hTRPC6 activation (n 9) but the channel did respond to subsequent application of SAG (n 4 out of 6). PMA (1 mM) had no effect on hTRPC6-containing inside-out patches (n 5), which subsequently reacted to SAG (n 3 out of 4). The addition of two monoacylglycerols, 1-oleoylglycerol (n 3) and 2-oleoyl-glycerol (n 3), at 100 mM did not increase hTRPC6 single-channel activity in inside-out patches.

Several mammalian members of the TRPC family, namely hTRPC3 (refs 12, 16), mTRPC5 (ref. 17) and hTRPC6 (ref. 10), are activated after stimulation of Gq/11-coupled receptors, yet the

Figure 3 Effect of DAG derivatives on hTRPC6 and rVR1 channels in inside-out patches. Cells were injected with cDNAs encoding hTRPC6 (a, b, c, e, f) or rVR1 (d). Channel activity is shown as NPo. a, OAG (100mM); b, SAG (10 mM); c, SLG (100mM); d, SAG and capsaicin (10 mM); e, InsP3 and SAG (10 mM); and f, PtdIns(4,5)P2 and SAG (10 mM) were added to the bath (solution B2); solution B3 was used in the pipette. The holding potential was -60 mV. Inset show sample traces collected at positions 1 and 2 (or 1±3 for SAG) of each graph.

Time (min) Time (min)

## letters to nature

mechanism of channel activation is poorly understood. hTRPC1 and bTRPC4 have been classi®ed as store-operated Ca2+-entry channels18,19. An alignment of the amino-acid sequences of the TRPC family members reveals a signi®cantly higher identity between TRPCs 3 and 6, as well as between TRPCs 4 (ref. 20) and 5, in comparison with other TRPC proteins, indicating that these structural similarities may also have a functional correlate. We therefore studied OAG- and histamine-induced Mn2+ in¯ux in cells expressing H1R together with hTRPC3, hTRPC6, mTRPC4 or mTRPC5. Cells expressing rVR1 or injected with H1R cDNA only served as controls (Fig. 4a). OAG (100 mM) stimulated Mn2+ in¯ux in hTRPC3- and hTRPC6-expressing cells only, and not in cells expressing mTRPC4 or mTRPC5. Histamine application, however, gave rise to profound Mn2+ quenches in cells expressing TRPCs 3, 6, 4 or 5, showing that all of these channels are activated after stimulation of a Gq/11-coupled receptor. Neither rVR1-expressing nor control-injected cells responded to OAG challenge by increasing Mn2+ in¯ux. Only cells expressing hTRPCs 3 and 6 showed an OAGinduced increase in [Ca2+]i; hTRPC1, mTRPC4, mTRPC5, rVR1 and control-injected cells remained unresponsive (Fig. 4b). The effect of OAG on hTRPC6 was concentration-dependent, with an effector concentration for half-maximal response of 117 mM (Fig. 4b, inset). Control cells never exhibited OAG- or DOGinduced Mn2+ in¯ux.

There are reasons to doubt that light-activated ion channels in Drosophila photoreceptors are gated exclusively by store depletion (summarized in refs 21, 22). Here we have delineated an alternative pathway for activation of such channels and have shown that hTRPC6 and hTRPC3 are activated by diacylglycerols in a storedepletion-independent, membrane-delimited manner. Our results may explain the rapid onset of initial Ca2+ in¯ux in response to stimulation of Gq/11-coupled receptors observed in several experimental systems23, as well as the requirement of PLC for the activation of hTRPC3 (ref. 16) and hTRPC6. Diacylglycerolmediated activation of non-selective cation currents has been observed in rabbit portal vein myocytes24. So far, however, hTRPC6 and hTRPC3 represent, to our knowledge, the ®rst molecularly de®ned ion channels that are known to be activated by diacylglycerols independently of protein kinase C. <sup>M</sup> .........................................................................................................................

#### Methods

Molecular cloning. hTRPC6 was cloned from human testis and placental total RNA by applying a PCR-based approach, and was subcloned into the expression vector pcDNA3 (Stratagene). VR1 (ref. 14), mTRPC4 (ref. 20), and mTRPC5 (ref. 17) cDNAs were isolated from rat dorsal root ganglia or mouse brain total RNA by using a similar strategy.

Cell culture and microinjection. CHO-K1 cells were seeded onto glass coverslips and cultured for 24 h. Intranuclear microinjection was done as described12. Injection mixtures contained 5 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, various combinations of 0.5mg ml -<sup>1</sup> channel cDNAs in pcDNA3, 0.005mg ml -<sup>1</sup> of H1R cDNAs in pCMV, and 0.002mg ml -<sup>1</sup> enhanced green-¯uorescent protein cDNA in pEGFP-C1. Control cells were injected with `empty' pcDNA3 vector.

Assessment of [Ca2+]i and Mn2+ in¯ux. Cells were loaded with fura-2-AM and superfused with buffer A containing (in mM): 120 NaCl, 6 KCl, 1.25 MgCl2, 5.5 glucose and 10 HEPES, pH 7.4, at a constant ¯ow rate of 5 ml min-<sup>1</sup> . Fura-2 ¯uorescence was recorded over manually de®ned regions of interest, with excitation alternating between 359 and 380 nm at 4-s intervals, using a digital ¯uorescence imaging system (TILL Photonics). To determine Mn2+ quenching, we added 200mM MnCl2 2 min before agonist stimulation. The decrease in ¯uorescence was monitored at the isosbestic wavelength (359 nm). Background ¯uorescence was determined by supplementing buffer A with 10 mM Triton-X100 and 10 mM MnCl2. [Ca2+]i was determined as described25. All data are presented as means 6 s:e:m:

Electrophysiology. The patch-clamp technique26 in whole-cell, cell-attached and inside-out mode was used to study hTRPC6, as well as rVR1 expressed in CHO-K1 cells. Solution B1 contained (in mM): 140 sodium isothionate, 5 potassium gluconate, 1.8 calcium gluconate, 1 magnesium gluconate, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; solution B2 contained: 120 sodium isothionate, 5.87 calcium gluconate, 1 magnesium gluconate, 10 EGTA, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; solution B3 contained: 120 CsCl, 1.8 calcium gluconate, 1 magnesium gluconate, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; solution B4 contained: 140 NMDG isothionate, 5 EGTA, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; solution B5 contained: 120 sodium isothionate, 1 EGTA, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; solution B6 contained: 10 calcium gluconate, 130 NMDG isothionate, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; solution B7 contained: 120 CsCl, 1 EGTA, 10 glucose and 10 HEPES; pipette solution P1 contained: 120 CsCl, 5.87 calcium gluconate, 1 magnesium gluconate, 10 EGTA and 10 HEPES. Solutions were buffered to pH 7.4. The osmolality was adjusted to 290±310 mosM with mannitol. An agar bridge served as the electrical connection between the bath and the signal ground. In whole-cell experiments, the access resistance was less than 10 MQ and series resistance compensation was set to 65±85%. For ¯uctuation analysis27, no series resistance compensation was used. Reversal potentials (E) of currents were determined from currents recorded during voltage ramps. Measurements were corrected for liquid-junction potentials. Relative ion permeabilities for monovalent cations were calculated as described11. The PCa/PNa permeability ratio was calculated according to the equation PCa=PNa {Na<sup>o</sup> 3 exp 2 FENa=RT expFECa=RTexpFECa=RT 1}=4Ca2o, where R, T and F are the gas constant, absolute temperature and Faraday's constant, respectively. In these experiments, bath solutions contained only one of the following cations: Na<sup>+</sup> (solution B5, ENa 2 10:2 6 1:5 mV, n 15), Ca2+ (solution B6, ECa 2 13:4 6 4:15 mV, n 12), or Cs+ (solution B7, ECs 1:6 6 2:1 mV, n 3). Analysis was performed with pClamp 6 software (Axon Instruments). Channel activity is expressed as NPo, calculated for consecutive 5-s intervals. In whole-cell experiments, data were ®ltered at 1 kHz; in single-channel experiments, data were ®ltered at 2.5 kHz. Bath solutions containing SAG, SLG, DOG, OAG and PtdIns(4,5)P2 were sonicated for 5 min before use. All experiments were performed at room temperature (21±26 8C). Data are presented as means 6 s:e:m:

#### Received 31 July; accepted 17 November 1998.

- 1. Clapham, D. E. Calcium signaling. Cell 80, 259±268 (1995).
- 2. Hoth, M. & Penner, R. Depletion of intracellular calcium stores activates a calcium current in mast cells. Nature 355, 353±356 (1992).
- 3. Zweifach, A. & Lewis, R. S. Mitogen-regulated Ca2+ current of T lymphocytes is activated by depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 6296±6299 (1993).
- 4. Berridge, M. J. Capacitative calcium entry. Biochem. J. 312, 1±11 (1995).
- 5. Putney, J. W. Jr A model for receptor-regulated calcium entry. Cell Calcium 7, 1±12 (1986).
- 6. Fasolato, C., Hoth, M., Matthews, G. & Penner, R. Ca2+ and Mn2+ in¯ux through receptor-mediated activation of nonspeci®c cation channels in mast cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 3068±3072 (1993).
- 7. Hardie, R. C. & Minke, B. Novel Ca2+ channels underlying transduction in Drosophila photoreceptors: implications for phosphoinositide-mediated Ca2+ mobilization. Trends Neurosci. 16, 371±376 (1993).
- 8. Zhu, X. et al. trp, a novel mammalian gene family essential for agonist-activated capacitative Ca2+ entry. Cell 85, 661±671 (1996).
- 9. Montell, C. New light on TRP and TRPL. Mol. Pharmacol. 52, 755±763 (1997).
- 10. Boulay, G. et al. Cloning and expression of a novel mammalian homolog of Drosophila transient receptor potential (Trp) involved in calcium entry secondary to activation of receptors coupled by the Gq class of G protein. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 29672±29680 (1997).
- 11. Hille, B. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes (Sinauer, Sunderland, Massachusetts, 1992).
- 12. Zitt, C. et al. Expression of TRPC3 in chinese hamster ovary cells results in calcium-activated cation currents not related to store depletion. J. Cell Biol. 138, 1333±1341 (1997).
- 13. Migas, I. & Severson, D. L. Diacylglycerols derived from membrane phospholipids are metabolized by lipases in A10 smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. 271, C1194±C1202 (1996).
- 14. Caterina, M. J. et al. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature 389, 816±824 (1997).
- 15. Huang, C.-L., Feng, S. & Hilgemann, D. W. Direct activation of inward recti®er potassium channels by PIP2 and its stabilization by Gbg. Nature 391, 803±806 (1998).
- 16. Zhu, X., Jiang, M. & Birnbaumer, L. Receptor-activated Ca2+ in¯ux via human Trp3 stably expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells. Evidence for a non-capacitative Ca2+ entry. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 133±142 (1998).
- 17. Okada, T. et al. Molecular cloning and functional characterization of a novel receptor-activated TRP Ca2+ channel from mouse brain. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 10279±10287 (1988).
- 18. Zitt, C. et al. Cloning and functional expression of a human Ca2+-permeable cation channel activated by calcium store depletion. Neuron 16, 1189±1196 (1996).
- 19. Philipp, S.et al. A mammalian capacitative calcium entry channel homologous to Drosophila TRP and TRPL. EMBO J. 15, 6166±6171 (1996).
- 20. Mori, Y. et al. Differential distribution of TRP Ca2+ channel isoforms in mouse brain. Neuroreport 9, 507±515 (1998).
- 21. Scott, K. & Zuker, C. TRP, TRPL and trouble in photoreceptor cells. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8, 383±388 (1998).
- 22. Montell, C. TRP trapped in ¯y signaling web. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8, 389±397 (1998).
- 23. Birnbaumer, L.et al. On the molecular basis and regulation of cellular capacitative calcium entry: roles for Trp proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 15195±15202 (1996).
- 24. Helliwell, R. M. & Large, W. A. a1-Adrenoceptor activation of a non-selective cation current in rabbit portal vein by 1,2-diacyl-sn-glycerol. J. Physiol. 499, 417±428 (1997).
- 25. Dippel, E., Kalkbrenner, F., Wittig, B. & Schultz, G. A heterotrimeric G protein complex couples the muscarinic m1 receptor to phospholipase C-b. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 1391±1396 (1996).
- 26. Hamill, O. P., Marty, A., Neher, E., Sakmann, B. & Sigworth, F. J. Improved patch-clamp techniques

for high-resolution current recording from cells and cell-free membrane patches. P¯ugers Arch. 391, 85±100 (1981).

27. Neher, E. & Stevens, C. F. Conductance ¯uctuations and ionic pores in membranes. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 6, 345±381 (1977).

Acknowledgements. We thank N. Albrecht for technical help with cell cultures, J.-C. Schwartz for providing the guinea pig H1 histamine receptor cDNA, and T. Plant for critically reading the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G.S. (e-mail: gschultz@zedat.fuberlin.de). The hTRPC6 cDNA sequence has been deposited at Genbank under accession number AF080394.

# ICOS is an inducible T-cell co-stimulator structurally and functionally related to CD28

Andreas Hutloff\*, Anna M. Dittrich\*², Katja C. Beier\*², Barbara Eljaschewitsch\*, Regine Kraft³, Ionnis Anagnostopoulos§ & Richard A. Kroczek\*

\* Molecular Immunology, Robert Koch-Institut, Nordufer 20, 13353 Berlin, Germany

³ Department of Protein Chemistry, Max-DelbruÈck-Centrum,

Robert-RoÈssle-Str. 10, 13122 Berlin, Germany

§ Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie UniversitaÈt Berlin,

.........................................................................................................................

Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, Germany

² These authors contributed equally to this work

The T-cell-speci®c cell-surface receptors CD28 and CTLA-4 are important regulators of the immune system. CD28 potently enhances those T-cell functions that are essential for an effective antigen-speci®c immune response1±5, and the homologous CTLA-4 counterbalances the CD28-mediated signals and thus prevents an otherwise fatal overstimulation of the lymphoid system6±9. Here we report the identi®cation of a third member of this family of molecules, inducible co-stimulator (ICOS), which is a homodimeric protein of relative molecular mass 55,000±60,000 (M<sup>r</sup> 55K±60K). Matching CD28 in potency, ICOS enhances all basic Tcell responses to a foreign antigen, namely proliferation, secretion of lymphokines, upregulation of molecules that mediate cell±cell interaction, and effective help for antibody secretion by B cells. Unlike the constitutively expressed CD28, ICOS has to be de novo induced on the T-cell surface, does not upregulate the production of interleukin-2, but superinduces the synthesis of interleukin-10, a B-cell-differentiation factor. In vivo, ICOS is highly expressed on tonsillar T cells, which are closely associated with B cells in the apical light zone of germinal centres, the site of terminal B-cell maturation. Our results indicate that ICOS is another major regulator of the adaptive immune system.

We identi®ed ICOS by generating monoclonal antibodies against activated human T cells. The ICOS-speci®c monoclonal antibody F44 did not react with resting human peripheral-blood T cells, but stained CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes that had been activated by stimulation of the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) complex (Fig. 1a). No signal was detected on resting or appropriately activated B cells, monocytes, natural killer cells, granulocytes, dendritic cells or platelets (data not shown). Immunoprecipitations using monoclonal antibody F44 de®ned the ICOS antigen as a disulphide-linked dimer, with an apparent relative molecular mass of 55K±60K, composed of a 27K and a 29K chain (Fig. 1b). We enriched ICOS protein from lysates of the ICOS-expressing T-cell line MOLT-4V by large-scale af®nity chromatography using F44, and further puri®ed the protein by two-dimensional preparative SDS±polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) (Fig. 1b). The 27K and 29K ICOSprotein species yielded identical peptide sequences, indicating that ICOS may be expressed on the cell surface as a homodimeric protein, with the two chains differing only in their post-translational modi®cation; this assumption was later con®rmed by transfection experiments (data not shown).

Using the peptide sequence, we cloned full-length ICOS complementary DNA (2,641 base pairs) from a MOLT-4V cDNA library. Northern analysis revealed a single ICOS messenger RNA species of ,2.8 kilobases in length in activated human T cells (Fig. 1c). The open reading frame of ICOS mRNA encodes a new protein of 199 amino acids with a predicted relative molecular mass of 22.6K. The ICOS amino-acid sequence shares 24% (17%) identity and 39% (39%) similarity with CD28 (Fig. 1d) (and CTLA-4 (ref. 10)). The predicted mature ICOS is a type-I transmembrane molecule (type I transmembrane proteins have their carboxy termini in the cytosol) that consists of a single immunoglobulin (Ig)V-like domain (stabilized by conserved cysteine residues at positions 42 and 109; Fig. 1d), a transmembrane region of ,23 amino acids, and a cytoplasmic tail of 35 amino acids, and it shows a close structural resemblance to CD28 (Fig. 1d) and CTLA-4 (ref. 10). The cysteine residue located at position 141 of CD28, also found in CTLA-4, is apparently involved in forming the disulphide bridge between the homodimeric chains of these proteins, and is also found in ICOS (position 136). The motif MYPPPY (positions 117±122 in CD28), required in its intact form for the binding of CD28 and CTLA-4 to their counterreceptors B7-1 and B7-2 (refs 11, 12), is not conserved in ICOS, indicating that ICOS may interact with a different receptor.

In a series of in vitro experiments, we compared ICOS to the main co-stimulatory effects of CD28 directly. We tested the ICOS-speci®c monoclonal antibody F44 in parallel with monoclonal antibody 9.3, one of the most potent CD28-speci®c reagents available1,13. When human peripheral-blood CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were suboptimally activated through the CD3 complex of the TCR, co-stimulation of T-cell proliferation by ICOS was comparable in potency to signalling by CD28 (shaded area in upper panel of Fig. 2a). This ®nding was remarkable, given that ICOS was present on at most 30±40% of the CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells under these experimental conditions (shaded area in lower panel of Fig. 2a), whereas CD28 continued to be expressed on nearly all CD4+ T cells. At higher dilutions of the CD3-speci®c monoclonal antibody OKT 3, the co-stimulatory effect of monoclonal antibody F44 could no longer be achieved, because the signal through the TCR complex was insuf®cient to induce the expression of the ICOS molecule on the T-cell surface (Fig. 2a, lower panel).

Only a small amount of most lymphokines is secreted from primary CD4+ T cells after optimal triggering of the CD3/TCR complex alone14. One characteristic of co-stimulation of CD4+ T cells by CD28 is the enhancement of cytokine secretion, in particular the `superinduction' of interleukin (IL)-2 (Fig. 2b and refs 1, 3, 4, 14). Surprisingly, co-stimulation by ICOS failed to signi®cantly upregulate IL-2 at any time point (Fig. 2b). However, co-stimulation by ICOS upregulated the secretion of IL-4, IL-5, interferon-g, tumour-necrosis factor-a and granulocyte/macrophage-colony-stimulating factor to 50±70% of the levels achieved with co-stimulation by CD28 (Fig. 2b and data not shown). ICOS and CD28 had markedly different co-stimulatory effects on the secretion of IL-10. In contrast to the modest stimulatory capacity of CD28, co-stimulation by ICOS routinely induced several-fold higher secretion of IL-10 (Fig. 2b); northern blot analysis con- ®rmed the upregulation of expression of IL-10 (data not shown). As the proportion of ICOS<sup>+</sup> T cells in the lymphokine-costimulation system did not exceed 50% (Fig. 2a, lower panel), on a per-cell basis ICOS matched the ability of CD28 to amplify the secretion of many lymphokines (except for IL-2), and was superior to CD28 in co-inducing IL-10.

T cells communicate with other cells of the immune system by de novo expression of cell-surface molecules, as well as by generating lymphokines. Co-stimulation of T cells through ICOS or CD28 markedly upregulated expression of CD154 (also known as CD40 ligand or TRAP), a molecule required for the crosstalk of T cells with