# A Role for Calcium Release-Activated Current (CRAC) in Cholinergic Modulation of Electrical Activity in Pancreatic (3-Cells

Richard Bertram,\* Paul Smolen,\* Arthur Sherman,\* David Mears,\*6 Illani Atwater,\* Franz Martin,~ and Bernat Soria'

\*Mathematical Research Branch and fLaboratory of Cell Biology and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; §Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA; and llDepartment of Physiology and Institute of Neurosciences, University of Alicante, 03080 Alicante, Spain

ABSTRACT S. Bordin and colleagues have proposed that the depolarizing effects of acetylcholine and other muscarinic agonists on pancreatic 3-cells are mediated by a calcium release-activated current (CRAC). We support this hypothesis with additional data, and present a theoretical model which accounts for most known data on muscarinic effects. Additional phenomena, such as the biphasic responses of 13-cells to changes in glucose concentration and the depolarizing effects of the sarco-endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase pump poison thapsigargin, are also accounted for by our model. The ability of this single hypothesis, that CRAC is present in 13-cells, to explain so many phenomena motivates a more complete characterization of this current.

## INTRODUCTION

The endocrine pancreas is controlled by blood glucose concentration and both sympathetic and parasympathetic input (Woods and Porte, 1974). Insulin secretion is elicited by an increase in blood glucose or parasympathetic stimulation. Secretion is inhibited by sympathetic input. In agreement with these in vivo observations, in vitro experiments on pancreatic islets of Langerhans show that cholinergic drugs potentiate glucose-induced insulin secretion (Henquin et al., 1988), whereas catecholamines inhibit insulin secretion (Ashcroft and Rorsman, 1989). We address the cholinergic effects on membrane potential and cytosolic Ca2' in this paper.

Increases in insulin release from islet (3-cells typically parallel increases in average free cytosolic Ca2" concentration (Cai), although there are exceptions (Gilon et al., 1993). Free cytosolic Ca2" levels are determined largely by the electrical activity of the 83-cell (Santos et al., 1991). In low glucose, islet (-cells are hyperpolarized and Cai is low. Application of acetylcholine (ACh) leads to a small depolarization and a small release of insulin (Henquin et al., 1988). In higher glucose concentrations, (3-cells burst in synchrony, a periodic behavior consisting of a phase of hyperpolarization during which Cai is low followed by an active phase of spiking accompanied by elevated Cai (Santos et al., 1991). There is great islet-to-islet variability when a cholinergic drug is applied under these conditions. The bursting is often superseded by a transient period of high-frequency spiking, followed by a transient membrane hyperpolarization. This is followed by a slow depolarization culminating in "musca-

X 1995 by the Biophysical Society

0006-3495/95/06/2323/10 \$2.00

rinic bursting", with a shortened period and a depolarized silent phase (Cook et al., 1981; Sanchez-Andres et al., 1988; Henquin et al., 1988; Santos and Rojas, 1989; S. Bordin, A. C. Boschero, E. M. Carneiro, and I. Atwater, submitted for publication). In single human (3-cells, cytosolic Ca" was observed to increase dramatically upon application of ACh, muscarine, or oxotremorine-m, a muscarinic agonist (Rojas et al., 1994). We present data here showing that in mouse islets Cai is also dramatically elevated following application of agonist (see Fig. 4 B).

At low glucose (3 mM), ACh (20,uM) increases the influx of 22Na', but not 45Ca21 (Henquin et al., 1988). When Na+ is removed from the bath, ACh fails to depolarize the cells, suggesting that the depolarizing action of ACh is through <sup>a</sup> current carried by Na+. Unpublished observations reported by F. Ashcroft and P. Rorsman (1989) have also suggested that activation of muscarinic receptors opens a channel permeable to Na+.

ACh activates muscarinic receptors in the (3-cell (Santos and Rojas, 1989), activating phospholipase C and producing inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (P3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). P3 releases Ca` from intracellular stores, while DAG activates protein kinase C, which sensitizes the secretory machinery to Ca2+ (Berridge and Irvine, 1989; Jones et al., 1985; Bozem et al., 1987). The mechanism by which muscarinic agonists open membrane channels and depolarize the (3-cell is unknown. We argue that it is a calcium release-activated current (CRAC), activated by depletion of Ca2+ stores in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and carried by Na+ and K+.

A linkage mechanism between Caer and membrane channels was first proposed by Putney and coworkers (Takemura et al., 1989; Putney, 1990). This "depletion hypothesis" states that when the ER calcium concentration becomes too low, a second messenger is released that diffuses outward to the cell membrane, where it opens Ca2+ channels. This increases Cai and refills ER calcium stores. Evidence for the diffusible "calcium influx factor" (CIF) has been reported in

Receivedforpublication 4 November 1994 and infinalform 13 March 1995. Address reprint requests to Dr. Richard Bertram, Mathematical Research Branch, National Institutes of Health, BSA Building, Suite 350, Bethesda, MD 20892. Tel.: 301-496-6136; Fax: 301-402-0535; E-mail: rbertram@helix.nih.gov.

a lymphocyte cell line (Randriamampita and Tsien, 1993). Evidence for CRAC current has been reported in mast cells (Hoth and Penner, 1992), lymphocytes (Zweifach and Lewis, 1993), Xenopus oocytes (Parekh et al., 1993), parotid acinar cells (Mertz et al., 1990; Randriamampita and Tsien, 1993), and pancreatic acinar cells (Bahnson et al., 1993).

Although there is no evidence for CIF in (-cells, there have been reports of nonselective cation currents with properties consistent with ICRAC- Silva et al. (1994) showed that raising the concentration of extracellular calcium in the presence of the L-type Ca>2 channel blocker nifedipine elicited a pronounced rise in Cai, attributed to increased influx of Ca>2 through nonselective voltage-independent channels. The rise in Cai was enhanced by depletion of ER Ca>. Worley et al. (1994) measured an increased voltage-independent inward current in (3-cells upon bath application of EGTA and removal of external Ca>2, which presumably deplete the ER and activate CRAC channels. Because of the persistence of this current in the absence of extracellular Ca>2, they suggested that it is carried by Na+ and K+. They also showed that the sarco-endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA) pump blocker thapsigargin (Tg) depolarizes islets. In HIT-T15 cells, Leech et al. (1994) showed that Tg induces Mn>2 influx. We present additional supporting data on Tg, including its slow transient effects (see Fig. 2).

Using <sup>a</sup> theoretical model, we investigate the implications of the hypothesis that CRAC current is present in 3-cells. We show that this model accounts for the effects of Tg and ACh, as well as the biphasic responses to changes in glucose concentration (Meissner and Atwater, 1976; Henquin, 1992; Roe et al., 1993). Thus, this single hypothesis suffices to explain many previously unexplained phenomena.

Some of this work has been presented previously in abstract form (Bertram et al., 1994).

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Electrophysiology

The details of the intracellular recording technique for microdissected mouse islets of Langerhans have been reported elsewhere (Atwater et al., 1978). Briefly, single microdissected mouse islets were continuously perifused with a modified Krebs solution containing, in mM, 120 NaCl, 25 NaCO3, 5 KCI, 2.5 CaCl2, and 1.1 MgCl2, which was equilibrated with 95% 02/5% CO2 to yield <sup>a</sup> pH of 7.4 at 37°C. Glucose was added to the medium without adjusting for osmotic changes. Cells were impaled with high resistance microelectrodes (150-250 Mfl), and (3-cells were identified based on bursting electrical activity in 11.1 mM glucose. Thapsigargin was added to the medium from <sup>a</sup> <sup>10</sup> mM stock solution in DMSO; acetylcholine was added from <sup>a</sup> <sup>10</sup> mM stock solution in water, kept on ice. A <sup>10</sup> mM diazoxide stock solution was obtained by first dissolving in a few drops of 1N NaOH, then adding deionized water to the desired concentration (<2% 1N NaOH). Carbamylcholine was added to the medium from <sup>10</sup> mM stock solution in H20. Membrane potential recordings in Fig. 2 were made with an EPC-7 amplifier (List Electronics, Darmstadt-Eberstadt, Germany), and those in Fig. 4 were made with an Axoclamp IIB amplifier (Axon Instruments, Foster City, CA). Membrane potential records were printed on a chart recorder and recorded on magnetic tape for future analysis.

# Ca, measurements

Islets of Langerhans were isolated by collagenase digestion as previously reported (Lernmark, 1974). Once isolated, islets were incubated for 60 min at 37°C in standard medium with the following composition (mM): 120 NaCl, 5 KCl, 25 NaHCO3, 2.5 CaCl2, and 1.1 MgCl2. Glucose (5 mM) and 3% bovine serum albumin were added. The medium was continuously equilibrated with <sup>a</sup> mixture of 02(95%) and CO2 (5%) for <sup>a</sup> final pH of 7.4. After incubation, islets were loaded at room temperature with 2 ,uM of Indo-1/AM (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in the same medium for 60 min. Loaded islets were placed in the superfusion chamber and left to settle down. Most of the islets adhered spontaneously to the bottom of the chamber within 3-6 min. The experimental superfusion chamber (volume 300 gl) was mounted on the stage of a Nikon-Diaphot inverted microscope and superfused at a rate of 1 ml/min with standard incubation medium. Glucose (11 mM) was added to the medium. Carbamylcholine was added to the medium from <sup>10</sup> mM stock solution in H20. Bath temperature was maintained at 36 ± l°Cby heating a stainless steel ring controlled by a thermostat. The temperature of the chamber was continuously monitored with a microthermistor. Cytosolic free calcium, expressed as the ratio of the two wavelengths (F41,/F480), was monitored by Indo-1 (Grynkiewicz et al., 1985), as reported (Valdeomillos et al., 1989).

## The mathematical model

The mathematical model consists of three components: one capable of bursting independently, one describing calcium handling, and one providing direct feedback from the ER to the cell membrane (CRAC current). The first component includes two fast calcium currents (ICaf and ICas) one of which (ICas) inactivates slowly; a delayed rectifying potassium current (IK); and an ATP-inactivated potassium current (IK(ATP)):

$$C\_{\rm m} \frac{dV}{dt} = -[I\_{\rm Caf} + I\_{\rm Ca} + I\_{\rm K} + I\_{\rm K(\rm ATP)}] \tag{1}$$

$$\frac{dn}{dt} = (n\_\pi(V) - n) / \tau\_n(V) \tag{2}$$

$$\frac{d\dot{j}}{dt} = (\dot{j}\_x(V) - \dot{j}) / \tau\_\text{j}(V). \tag{3}$$

V represents membrane potential, n is activation of IK' and j is inactivation of 'Cas. Ionic currents are given by:

$$I\_{\rm Caf} = \bar{\mathfrak{g}}\_{\rm Caf} m\_{\mathfrak{f}\_{\rm \varepsilon}^{\rm ex}}(V)(V - V\_{\rm Ca}) \tag{4}$$

$$I\_{\rm Cas} = \bar{\mathfrak{g}}\_{\rm Cas} j m\_{\rm s,x}(V)(V - V\_{\rm Cu}) \tag{5}$$

$$I\_{\mathbf{k}} = \bar{\mathbf{g}}\_{\mathbf{k}} n(V - V\_{\mathbf{k}}) \tag{6}$$

$$I\_{\mathbf{K}(\text{ATP})} = \overline{\mathbf{g}}\_{\mathbf{K}(\text{ATP})} (V - V\_{\mathbf{K}}).\tag{7}$$

This is based on the model of Chay and Cook (1988), with calcium-dependent inactivation of Ic replaced by voltagedependent inactivation and with the addition of IK(ATP) Other parameter changes have been made to accommodate these modifications. In particular, kCas now activates at <sup>a</sup> more depolarized voltage than ICaf' consistent with data from Satin and Cook (1988). Expressions for the infinity and time constant functions are given in the Appendix, as are values of all parameters.

Action potentials are generated by the interaction of the instantaneously activated Ca2" currents and the less rapidly activated delayed rectifier, while IK(ATP) is a background current, whose conductance is a decreasing function of glucose concentration. Bursting is driven by the V-dependent modulation of the inactivation variable j, which is much slower than V and n.

The second component of our model includes equations for calcium handling, based on Li and Rinzel (1994), and a calcium-activated potassium current (IK(cA)). Equations for the concentrations of free cytosolic (Cai) and free ER calcium (Caer) are:

$$\frac{V\_i}{f\_i}\frac{dCa\_i}{dt} = J\_{\text{er}} + J\_{\text{mem}} \tag{8}$$

$$\frac{V\_{\text{er}}}{f\_{\text{er}}} \frac{dCa\_{\text{er}}}{dt} = -J\_{\text{er}}.\tag{9}$$

Jmem and Jer represent Ca2` flux through the plasma and ER membranes, respectively. V1 and Ver represent cytosolic and ER volumes, while f1 and fer are the ratios of free to total calcium in each compartment. Expressions for the Ca2" fluxes are:

$$J\_{\rm mem} = -\alpha (I\_{\rm Cuf} + I\_{\rm Cas}) - k\_{\rm Cu} Ca\_i \tag{10}$$

$$J\_{\rm er} = (P\_{\rm leak} + P\_{\rm ip3}O\_{\rm a})(Ca\_{\rm er} - Ca\_{\rm i}) - J\_{\rm er, p}.\tag{11}$$

a is the conversion factor from current to flux, kCaCai and Jer,p represent fluxes through the plasma membrane pumps and SERCA pumps, Pleak is the calcium leakage permeability through the ER membrane, and Pip3is calcium permeability through IP3-activated Ca2` channels in the ER membrane. The fraction of open IP3-activated channels is O,. = a.b.h., where a. represents activation by Cat; b., lP3 activation; and h., inactivation by Cai (unlike Li and Rinzel (1994), we model this inactivation as instantaneous, a simplification that has no significant effect on our simulations). Detailed expressions for the pumps and 0. are contained in the Appendix.

There is experimental evidence for both voltagedependent (Cook et al., 1984) and voltage-independent (Ammala et al., 1991, 1993) K(Ca) current in the j3-cell. For simplicity, we include only a voltage-independent current:

$$I\_{\mathbf{K}(\mathbf{Ca})} = \bar{\mathfrak{g}}\_{\mathbf{K}(\mathbf{Ca})} \frac{Ca\_{\parallel}^{\mathfrak{s}}}{Ca\_{\parallel}^{\mathfrak{s}} + (0.5\mathfrak{S})^{\mathfrak{s}}} (V - V\_{\mathbf{K}}).\tag{12}$$

This expression is identical to that used in the model of

Keizer and De Young (1993) to explain the periodic interruptions of tonic spiking due to repetitive release of Ca2" observed in high concentrations of 1P3 and glucose (Ammala et al., 1991, 1993). Our model exhibits this behavior if it is extended to provide dynamics for 1P3 channel inactivation (h \$ h.(Cai)).

The first two components of our model provide a glucoseinduced bursting mechanism and give a reasonable glucose dose-response curve. However, it is only with the addition of the third component, <sup>a</sup> CRAC current (ICRAC) that the model is capable of producing the effects of Tg and ACh. We model this current by:

$$I\_{\rm CRAC} = \mathfrak{g}\_{\rm CRAC} r\_{\rm w} (Ca\_{\rm w}) (V - V\_{\rm CRAC}) \tag{13}$$

where r represents Caer-dependent activation. Lacking data on the kinetics of this current in 13-cells, we model it as instantaneous. Because the emptying and filling of the ER is slow, any activation delay of ICRAC would have only a minor effect, as we have verified with the model (not shown). There is also a lack of data on the levels of Caer at which ICRAC is activated, or even typical values of Caer. We assume that ICRAC is half activated when Caer = <sup>3</sup> ,uM (r.(3) = 0.5), corresponding to 30-40% depletion of the ER. The halfactivation level could be adjusted up or down to accommodate future measurements of ER Ca2" concentration. Finally, we assume that ICRAC carries Na+ and K+ and reverses at 0 mV.

With the addition of the K(Ca) and CRAC currents, the voltage equation becomes:

$$C\_{\rm m} \frac{dV}{dt} = -[I\_{\rm Caf} + I\_{\rm Ca} + I\_{\rm K} + I\_{\rm K(ATP)} + I\_{\rm K(Ca)} + I\_{\rm CRAC}].\tag{14}$$

Equations were integrated numerically using a Gear method implemented in the software package LSODE. This method works well on systems such as ours with multiple time scales. All computations were carried out on an IBM RS/6000 computer.

## RESULTS

#### Simulated glucose-induced bursting

In our model, membrane potential reaches action potential threshold through the depolarizing effects of Icas. At the start of the active phase of bursting the inactivation variable j is high, so Ic. is strong. During the active phase, j decreases until there is not enough depolarizing current to sustain the electrical activity and the cell enters a hyperpolarized quiescent phase, during whichj increases and the cell is brought back to threshold (Fig. 1). In contrast, Cai rises almost immediately at the onset of the active phase and falls quickly at the onset of the quiescent phase. This fast variation of Ca1, which is too fast to drive glucose-induced bursting, is consistent with experiments (Santos et al., 1991). Also consistent with experiments is the property that an increase in glucose concentration, through reduction in gK(ATp), increases the ratio of active phase duration to burst period (plateau fraction),

activity.

Simulated glucose-induced bursting K(gArp) =150 pS, I FIGURE <sup>1</sup> 0 t,M). (A) dependent ina j represents ch of bursting; it

not. right). while havir tentials (no peak Ca. is

Fig. 2 shows the effect of Tg on (-cell electrical activity. The leftmost portion of the top trace illustrates normal bursting <sup>10</sup> <sup>20</sup> <sup>30</sup> <sup>40</sup> <sup>6</sup> [> induced by 11.1 mM glucose. Addition of <sup>1</sup> ,uM Tg to the perifusion medium (as indicated by the arrow in the top trace) had little immediate effect on the burst pattern. During the <sup>24</sup> minutes between traces A and B in Fig. 2, the Tg concentration was progressively increased to 3 ,uM. This was accompanied by a gradual increase in the plateau fraction and burst frequency. Shortly after the Tg concentration was changed to <sup>5</sup> ZM (Fig. <sup>2</sup> B, arrow), the silent phase potential 10 20 30 40 50 60 began to depolarize and both the plateau fraction and burst Time (so) frequency increased further. At the time indicated by the arrow in Fig. 2 C, Tg was removed completely from the dembrane potential. (B) Cytosolic Ca2. (C) j, the voltage- perifusion medium and the electrical activity shifted to <sup>a</sup> ctivation of IC,. Following the Hodgkin-Huxley convention, pattern of almost continuous spiking, with no hyperpolariiannel availability. Its slow decline terminates the active phase zation during the brief silent phases. Addition of 100 ,uM ts slow recovery terminates the silent phase. ACh (Fig. 2 D) rapidly brought the cell to continuous spiking. The combined effect of Tg and ACh on membrane pong little effect on the amplitude of the action po- tential was irreversible, as indicated by the maintenance of <sup>t</sup> shown). Thus, average Cai is increased, while continuous activity following removal of ACh (Fig. 2 D,

FIGURE <sup>2</sup> Effect of Tg on 3-cell membrane potential. Glucose concentration was 11.1 mM throughout the recording. (A) <sup>1</sup> ,uM Tg was added as indicated by the arrow. During the time between the top two traces (24 min), Tg concentration was progressively increased to 3 ,uM. (B) Tg concentration was increased to <sup>5</sup> ,uM at the arrow. 30 <sup>s</sup> elapsed between the end of B and the start of C. (C) Tg was removed at the arrow. (D) (Continuation of trace C) The islet was exposed to <sup>a</sup> 90-s pulse of <sup>100</sup> ,uM ACh as indicated. Time between D and E was <sup>14</sup> min. (E) Burst pattern restored by <sup>22</sup> JIM Dz (left). Increasing Dz to 50 ,uM (6 min between left and right sides of E) abolished spiking.

Five cells were subjected to a similar experimental protocol, with Tg concentration varying from <sup>1</sup> to 10 p,M. Two other cells were exposed to brief pulses of Tg (5 ,uM for 90 <sup>s</sup> and <sup>1</sup> ,tM for 180 s). In all cases the membrane potential records during Tg treatment or following Tg pulses were qualitatively similar to Fig. 2, with the silent phase progressively (over 30-60 min) depolarizing, eventually leading to continuous spiking. These results indicate that thapsigargin is irreversible and the stimulation of elevated electrical activity by Tg is critically dependent on the time required for Tg to take effect rather than the Tg concentration.

We will argue (see below) that Tg and ACh both depolarize the (3-cell by emptying the ER of Ca2 , thus activating ICRAC. Their effects on the electrical activity of the cell differ in the extent to which they deplete the ER, Tg being more effective at the concentrations used. Since the effects of Tg are irreversible, its depolarization of the islet can only be attenuated by adding an outward current to oppose the depletion-activated inward ICRAC If our hypothesis is correct, it should be possible to bring the islet from the Tg-induced continuous spiking state (Fig. 2 D) to a state of muscarinic bursting by titrating diazoxide (Dz) into the Krebs solution, enhancing the outwardK(ATP)

When Dz was progressively titrated into the Krebs solution, a muscarinic-like burst pattern (cf. Fig. 4 A) was indeed generated, having properties quite different from the control bursts in Fig. 2 A. With Dz concentration of 22 ,uM (Fig. 2 E, left), the bursts were extremely rapid (10-16/min), and there was no hyperpolarization in the silent phase. In 50 ,uM Dz, the spiking ceased and the cell hyperpolarized. When Dz was removed, continuous spiking was restored (not shown).

The detailed mechanisms through which Tg inactivates the SERCA pumps are unknown. Nor is it known why Tg takes so long to act. For these reasons, we simulated the steady state behavior of the (3-cell after Tg application (after all SERCA pumps are inactivated), by setting Verp = 0 (so that Jer,p = 0; see Appendix). We omit the long transient period during which pumps are presumably being inactivated. A control bursting pattern is shown in Fig. 3 A, while Fig. <sup>3</sup> B shows the electrical activity with Jer <sup>p</sup> = 0. The depolarizing current responsible for taking the cell to continuous spiking iSICsAC which was activated by the depletion of ER Ca2+ accompanying the inactivation of the SERCA pumps.

Titration of Dz in the presence of Tg was also simulated, by stepping gK(ATP) from control to progressively higher values. As in Fig. 2 E, this induced muscarinic bursting, with a short burst period and a depolarized silent phase (Fig. 3 C). When gKATp) was made sufficiently large, all spiking ceased and the membrane hyperpolarized (Fig. 3 D). Tonic spiking resumed when Dz was removed (gKATp) returned to control).

We also simulated the effect of partial blockage of the SERCA pump by reducing verp to <sup>a</sup> non-zero value. When ver <sup>p</sup> is one-half its standard value, muscarinic bursting is produced (not shown), rather than continuous spiking (Fig. 3 B). When ver,p is 25% of its standard value, the model cell spikes continuously (not shown).

FIGURE <sup>3</sup> Simulated application of Tg to <sup>a</sup> bursting cell (gK(ATP) = <sup>150</sup> ps, IP3 = 0, kc, = 0.1). (A) Control. (B) Following inactivation of SERCA pumps, modeled by setting Jerp = 0. Transients are omitted. (C) Addition of Dz, modeled by increasing gK(ATp) to 250 pS, at the arrow. (D) Dz concentration increased (gK(ATP) = 300 pS), at the first arrow. At the second arrow Dz is removed K(gATp) returned to 150 pS).

We have observed experimentally (data not shown) that after preincubating an islet in Tg for 20 min or longer in the absence of glucose, adding stimulatory glucose (11.1 mM) to the medium leads to an immediate depolarization and continuous spiking. This was also shown by Worley et al. (1994) and is similar to what is observed when Dz is removed from an islet preincubated with both Tg and stimulatory glucose, as described above. Both procedures reduce IK(ATp) and, since ICRAC is maximally activated due to previous Tg-induced blockade of the SERCA pumps, rapidly depolarize the cell to a tonic-spiking state.

#### Application of muscarinic agonists

Islet response to muscarinic agonists is glucose-dependent. In low glucose, agonists induce small depolarizations (Henquin et al., 1988; S. Bordin, A. C. Boschero, E. M. Carneiro, and I. Atwater, submitted for publication). In stimulatory glucose, low agonist concentrations lead to an increased burst frequency. High agonist concentrations induce a multiphasic response (Fig. 4 A and Sanchez-Andres et al., 1988; S. Bordin, A. C. Boschero, E. M. Carneiro, and I. Atwater, submitted for publication). First, the cell often spikes with high frequency during one last burst. This is followed by membrane hyperpolarization, which can last for tens of seconds. This hyperpolarization is accompanied by a decrease

FIGURE 4 Effects of muscarinic agonist on membrane potential and Cat. (A) Continuous recording of the effects of 100 ,uM carbamylcholine (carbachol) on glucose-induced electrical activity. Carbamylcholine was added as indicated by the arrow and removed before the lapse. Lapse: 15 min. Glucose concentration was <sup>11</sup> mM throughout the recording. (B) Effect of 100 ,uM carbamylcholine on glucose-induced Cai oscillations in a single islet of Langerhans. Glucose concentration was <sup>11</sup> mM throughout the recording. Cai is expressed as the ratio between the fluorescence emission at two wavelengths, 410 nm and 480 nm. According to calibration estimates, peak Cai during glucose-induced bursting is 0.23 ,uM and during muscarinic bursting is 0.3 ,uM. The overall peak is 0.45 ,iM.

in the input resistance (unpublished observations by J. Sanchez-Andres and B. Soria). Then there is a slow depolarization and the cell enters a muscarinic bursting state, consisting of short high frequency bursts with slower rising and falling phases than glucose-induced bursts and depolarized silent phases. Muscarinic bursting persists as long as agonist is present.

Accompanying this response in membrane potential is a multiphasic Cai response (Fig. 4 B). This consists of an initial large increase in Ca1, followed by a partial decay to a plateau concentration well above the average in stimulatory glucose alone. Superimposed on this plateau are small oscillations corresponding to muscarinic bursts. We believe the initial rise in Cai is due mainly to release from intracellular stores. The decrease in Ca1 from this peak value presumably corresponds both to the decreased flux of Ca2+ from intracellular stores as they empty and the cessation of Ca2+ influx across the cell membrane when hyperpolarized. The final, sustained phase is, we believe, due to influx accompanying muscarinic bursting.

Application of a muscarinic agonist was simulated in our mathematical model by increasing IP3 concentration, which produced multiphasic responses in membrane potential and Cai (Fig. 5). Ca2" channels in the ER membrane are activated

FIGURE <sup>5</sup> Simulated application of <sup>a</sup> muscarinic agonist. gKATP) = <sup>150</sup> pS throughout. At the arrow, IP3 concentration was increased from 0 to 0.6 ,uM. ICRAC (not shown) follows Caer. During the silent phase of glucoseinduced bursting, ICRAC = -0.1 pA. During the silent phase of muscarinic bursting, ICRAC = -1.2 pA. Cai, rather than j, drives muscarinic bursting.

by the IP3, causing a large initial release of Ca21 from the ER, which activates IK(Ca). The resulting hyperpolarization shuts off Ca21 influx through voltage-dependent plasma membrane channels, causing Cai to decrease. As Cai decreases, deactivating IK(Ca) so too does Caer (Fig. 5 C), activating ICRAC' with the combined effect of depolarizing the membrane above spike threshold. This leads to a transient period of tonic spiking, followed by muscarinic bursting.

Whereas glucose-induced bursting in our model is driven by slow oscillations in the inactivation variablej, muscarinic bursting is driven by significantly faster oscillations in Ca;. The range of values over which Cai oscillated before agonist application was too low to significantly activate IK(Ca) With the addition of agonist, average Ca; is elevated and IK(Ca) is sufficiently activated to influence the membrane and drive the burst. IcRAC provides a depolarizing background current, which opposes IK(ca) and prevents the membrane from hyperpolarizing. The inactivation variable j, which varies on a longer time scale, changes little over a muscarinic burst period and plays no role in driving the muscarinic burst (Fig. S D).

When this simulation is repeated using <sup>a</sup> smaller value of gK(Ca) (not shown), two qualitative changes in the Vrecord are evident: the duration of the initial hyperpolarization is re-

duced, <sup>z</sup> rather <sup>t</sup> muscari hyperpc

### Biphas

5rom rest to a state of continuous spiking lasting for a ration of the first phase of spiking is marginal. There is activity larizes f minute ( and Atv compan first pha explaine phases. a signifi

state. ization is determined primarily by the ER filling rate. We <sup>p</sup> of ICRAC so thatv which, <sup>E</sup> into cor both Ca maintaii bursting

Our <sup>s</sup> the ons(

FIGURE <sup>6</sup> Biphasic response to glucose, simulated by decreasing gKATP from <sup>5000</sup> to <sup>150</sup> pS, at the arrow. ICRAC = -4.5 pA before glucose application.

and the cell evolves to a state of continuous spiking, tally. This decrease is attributed to a metabolic increase in than muscarinic bursting. Under these conditions, Ca2" pump activity, which precedes the block of K(ATP) inic bursting occurs only transiently, between the current (Roe et al., 1993; Nadal et al., 1994). We have simu- )larization and the tonic spiking. lated this with the model by increasing Ca" pump flux parameters before decreasing gK(ATP), but do not show it here so as to emphasize that the first transient phase of spiking can sic response to glucose be accounted for solely by ICRAC- Our simulations show that <sup>a</sup> characteristic biphasic response of 13-cell electrical the increase in Caer resulting from the increased SERCA to application of stimulatory glucose. The islet depo- pump rate is small, and its effect through ICRAC on the du-

Or more before synchronized bursting begins (Meissner The dramatic rise in Cai after application of stimulatory vater, 1976). The initial tonic electrical activity is ac- glucose is similar in appearance to the initial rise induced by ied by <sup>a</sup> sustained elevation of Cai (Roe et al., 1993). The ACh. Why, then, is the electrical activity so different? First, se of spiking and elevated Cai has not been adequately there is <sup>a</sup> difference in the magnitude of the rise in Cai. The d with earlier models, which produce at best short initial higher Ca1 induced by ACh activates more K,) than is ac-Simulations with the present model, however, produce tivated by glucose. Next, because the cell was bursting at the icant first phase (Fig. 6). time when ACh was applied (Fig. 5), Caer was high and ICRAC )ropose that the first phase is due to an initial excess was almost completely deactivated, leaving the hyperpolar-In low glucose the ER is largely depleted of Ca2+, izing current IK(ca) largely unopposed. In contrast, Ca,, was vhen glucose is added (QK(ATp) reduced) ICRAC is large, low before the application of glucose, so that ICRAC was along with the reduction of IK(ATP) depolarizes the cell present to counterbalance, and overwhelm, IK(Ca). Thus, the itinuous spiking. The resulting influx of Ca2+ raises duration of the initial ACh hyperpolarization is determined <sup>1</sup>and Caer, deactivating ICRAC until it is insufficient to primarily by the decay rate of Cai from its high peak value, n tonic electrical activity, and the cell settles into a whereas the duration of the initial glucose-induced depolar-

simulation does not show the decrease in Ca1 before Areverse biphasic response is sometimes observed upon stepet of electrical activity that is observed experimen- ping glucose from one stimulatory concentration to a lower, but still stimulatory, concentration. After this reduction, the bursting cells hyperpolarize for up to several minutes before bursting is resumed (Beigelman et al., 1977; Cook, 1984; Henquin, 1992). Insulin secretion is also transiently reduced after reduction in glucose (Grodsky et al., 1967). According to our model, this biphasic response in electrical activity is again related to ICRAC. In high glucose, Caer is elevated and ICRAC almost completely ; <sup>V</sup> ; <sup>l</sup> , ldeactivated. If glucose concentration is subsequently reduced to .\_\_.\_.\_.\_,\_.\_.\_\_.\_.\_.\_.\_.\_.\_\_,\_.\_.\_.\_. an almost substimulatory level, where ICRAc becomes necessary <sup>o</sup> 50 100 <sup>150</sup> 200 to bring the membrane potential to spike threshold, the membrane will hyperpolarize until Caer falls far enough to activate

i In summary, we argue that the initial tonic spiking following glucose application and the initial hyperpolarization following reduction of glucose are caused by an excess or a deficit, respectively, of IcRAC. If glucose concentration is .\_ \_\_.\_\_.\_ .\_.\_ \_. ramped slowly enough for Caer to adjust to the new condi<sup>o</sup> So 100 150 200 tions, our model indicates that the transients will be eliminated. This was in fact observed experimentally when glu- .\_\_\_ \_\_\_ cose concentration was ramped from <sup>0</sup> to <sup>a</sup> stimulatory concentration (Beigelman et al., 1977). The first phase of elevated insulin secretion was also eliminated when glucose concentration was slowly ramped, rather than abruptly increased, to a stimulatory concentration (Grodsky, 1972).

## DISCUSSION

We have shown that the SERCA pump blocker Tg depolarizes pancreatic islets in the presence of stimulatory glucose (Fig. 2), consistent with the hypothesis that a depolarizing current, which is activated by depletion of ER calcium, is present. The heightened electrical activity induced by Tg was maintained even after the drug was removed (Fig. 2 D, right). Cells that were given only brief exposures to Tg also exhibited elevated electrical activity after 30-60 minutes, indicating that considerable time is required for Tg to empty the intracellular Ca21 stores. In Fig. 2 C there remains <sup>a</sup> well defined silent phase in <sup>5</sup> ,M Tg. However, almost immediately after Tg was removed, the silent phase ceased to hyperpolarize, and the electrical activity became nearly continuous. The same effect was seen in four other cells, indicating that in addition to emptying the intracellular Ca21 stores, Tg may have some hyperpolarizing effect on the cell membrane, which is reversible upon removal of the drug.

We next showed that carbamylcholine, <sup>a</sup> muscarinic agonist, produces a multiphasic response in (3-cell membrane potential and cytosolic Ca21 concentration in the presence of stimulatory concentrations of glucose (Fig. 4). The first phase is characterized by <sup>a</sup> dramatic rise in Cai, which we believe is due mainly to release of Ca21 from intracellular stores. This is followed by membrane hyperpolarization, during which Ca; falls toward <sup>a</sup> plateau level. We attribute this hyperpolarization to Ca2' activation of <sup>a</sup> K(Ca) current. Finally, the cells enter a muscarinic bursting state with short period and depolarized silent phase. This bursting is accompanied by oscillations in Cai due solely to influx through plasma membrane Ca21 channels, which range over much higher concentrations than in glucose-induced bursting.

The transient hyperpolarization after application of a muscarinic agonist has been observed before (Sanchez-Andres et al., 1988; Santos and Rojas, 1989), but is not always present (Cook et al., 1981). There appears to be a relationship between the duration of the hyperpolarization and the agonist concentration, with longer hyperpolarizations accompanying greater agonist concentrations (the authors, unpublished observation). Another feature often observed following application of agonist is a period of high-frequency spiking preceding the transient hyperpolarization. The ionic mechanism behind this is still unclear, and at present cannot be accounted for by the model. Differences in experimental conditions, such as different agonist perfusion rates, may be partly responsible for the response variability.

The effects of Tg and muscarinic agonists can be accounted for by the hypothesis that CRAC current is present in the (3-cell. To show this, we constructed a theoretical model and simulated the application of the drugs (Figs. 3 and 5). This hypothesis also accounts for the differing effects of glucose and ACh on membrane potential: 1) Electrical activity can be initiated by increasing glucose concentration, whereas ACh can only depolarize the cell slightly in the absence of stimulatory glucose. This is consistent with the hypothesis that ACh activates <sup>a</sup> CRAC current that is much smaller than the K(ATP) current inhibited by glucose. 2) Atransient hyperpolarization precedes muscarinic bursting, while a transient depolarization precedes glucose-induced bursting. The former is due to activation of IK(ca) following release of ER Ca2 , while the latter is due to excess CRAC current activated in low glucose when the ER is depleted of Ca2". 3)

Increasing glucose concentration raises the plateau fraction of bursting, whereas adding ACh has little effect. The burst frequency is higher and the silent phase depolarized in muscarinic bursting. These are by-products of the different mechanisms driving glucose-induced bursting and muscarinic bursting. 4) Finally, our model predicts that addition of ACh lowers ER calcium concentration, while addition of glucose raises it.

Our belief that the Tg and ACh effects share <sup>a</sup> common mechanism, CRAC current, is supported by the observation that muscarinic-like bursting is obtained when Dz is added to an islet with prior exposure to Tg (Fig. 2 E). In our simulations (Fig. 3 C), bursting produced in this way is indeed "muscarinic", in that it is driven by variations in Cai acting through IK(c).

We showed that the biphasic response to glucose can be attributed to CRAC current, which is strongly activated in low glucose. The initial phase is terminated by the rise in Cae, and consequent deactivation of ICRAC which accompanies spiking. If glucose is slowly ramped up to a stimulatory level, then there should be no first phase. If the rise in Caer is inhibited by prior application of Tg, the first phase persists indefinitely.

Our explanation contrasts with the hypothesis of Roe et al. (1993) that the initial phase is the result of depolarizationtriggered Ca2+ release from intracellular stores. In our simulations, the ER actually takes up Ca<sup>2</sup> after glucose application, and the initial increase in Cai is due solely to influx of Ca2+ through the plasma membrane. Indeed, one strength of our model is that it explains the simultaneous elevation of both average Ca; and electrical activity during the first phase of the glucose response; without CRAC current the rise in Cai would tend to hyperpolarize the islet.

Can the Tg or ACh effects be explained without CRAC current? Without ICRAC our model is similar to that of Keizer and De Young (1993), except that we assume instantaneous relaxation of the IP3 inactivation variable to its steady state (h = h,(Cai)). Keizer and De Young (1993) showed that their model is capable of displaying a wide range of behaviors due to IP3-induced oscillations in the ER and cytosolic Ca21 concentrations, but they did not address muscarinic bursting or the effects of Tg. We simulated the application of Tg and ACh with our model, setting gcRAc = <sup>0</sup> to see if the effects of these drugs could be reproduced in the absence of IcRAc. When the application of Tg was simulated, we found that the burst frequency increased dramatically, but there was no overall depolarization. The increased burst frequency is due to IK(ca), which is activated by the higher levels of Cai attained in the absence of ER Ca2' buffering. The absence of depolarization is to be expected, since the only plasma membrane current linked to Ca21 is the inhibitory 'K(Ca). Indeed, it is hard to envision any mechanism for the Tg-induced depolarization that does not include an excitatory current linked to ER or cytosolic calcium. When application of ACh was simulated, only a transient period of high-frequency bursting was seen, followed by normal bursting.

The claim that muscarinic agonists act through ICEAC is further supported by data (Henquin et al, 1988, Fig. 3) showing that (3-cells depolarized by as much as <sup>5</sup> mV when ACh was added

to a low glucose solution, this depolarization lasting as long as the agonist was present (-6 min). We argue that, unless this depolarization is transient, it is due either to <sup>a</sup> direct effect ofACh on a plasma membrane current (perhaps through G-protein coupling), or to activation of CRAC current. An alternative, that the depolarization represents a change in equilibrium membrane potential brought about by a Cat-dependent plasma membrane current, can be dismissed through a calcium-balance argument. Membrane potential and cytosolic Ca2+ are coupled through plasma membrane ion channels and pumps. Cytosolic C(a2 and ER Ca+ are coupled through an 'P3-activated C(2+ current, SERCA pumps, and Ca(' leakage. However, ER Ca2+ and membrane potential are directly coupled only if CRAC current is present. Hence, in the absence of CRAC current, equilibrium membrane potential and cytosolic calcium concentration are determined independently of Caer and any ER parameters (such as IP3). This argument is independent of any mathematical model.

In our simulations we addressed the possibility that the Tg and ACh effects are mediated through G-protein coupling to plasma membrane channels, by adding a voltage-independent leakage current to the model, whose conductance is zero unless Tg or ACh is present. When application of either Tg or ACh was simulated, the model cell behaved as it did when ICRAC was present. However, the leakage current is not activated in glucose alone, and thus does not account for the biphasic response to glucose. Experimentally, one could test whether CRAC current or an agonist-activated leakage current is involved in the Tg or ACh responses by applying the agents to an excised membrane patch. If this results in an opening of ion channels, then this is evidence for an agonist-activated leakage mechanism. (This experiment is inconclusive if no channels are opened, since this could be explained either by the absence of an ER or the absence of G proteins.)

In this paper we have investigated the implications of a hypothetical CRAC current in /3-cells with <sup>a</sup> minimal mathematical model. We assumed that slow inactivation of <sup>a</sup> Ca2" current is responsible for driving glucose-induced bursting, but the results do not depend upon the specific burst mechanism. Other burst mechanisms, such as slow modulation of a K+ current, could be incorporated into the model with little impact on the agonist-induced behaviors. We have done this, for example, with a model driven by slow oscillations in K(ATP) current (Smolen and Keizer, 1992). This is an important point, since the mechanism behind glucose-induced bursting is still a matter of debate (Satin and Smolen, 1994). We have also assumed that <sup>a</sup> voltage-independent K(Ca) current is present in the /3-cell and is important in muscarinic bursting, but the role of this current in muscarinic bursting could be played by a voltage-dependent K(Ca) current. Similarly, the results do not depend upon our choice of the ER Ca2' handling model. Other models, such as that due to Keizer and De Young (1993) or even <sup>a</sup> linear ER model, would be equally effective. Although there is now evidence supporting the presence of CRAC current in the /3-cell (Silva et al., 1994; Worley et al., 1994; Leech et al., 1994), it has not been well characterized. Therefore, we have made several assumptions regarding the conductance and ER calcium

sensitivity of this channel, as well as typical levels of free Ca2" concentration in the ER. If future measurements of one quantity, such as ER Ca2" concentration, show one of our assumptions to be invalid, this does not necessarily invalidate our model since other parameters, such as the sensitivity of the CRAC channel, can be adjusted to account for the new data. However, future data can invalidate the model if it shows, for instance, that ER Ca2" concentration is much greater than the activation level for ICRAC. It is our hope that the explanatory potential of the CRAC current demonstrated in this paper will motivate further experimentation to test some of the predictions made with the model and to identify other behaviors that can be attributed to this current.

## APPENDIX

In our computations we use an alternate form of the calcium handling equations (Eqs. 8 and 9):

$$\frac{dCa\_i}{dt} = \frac{1}{\lambda} \left[ \left( \frac{P\_{\text{leak}}}{P\_{\text{ip3}}} + O\_{\text{o}} \right) (Ca\_{\text{w}} - Ca\_i) - \frac{J\_{\text{eq.g}}}{P\_{\text{ip3}}} \right] + \frac{J\_{\text{mcm}}}{V\_{\text{i,eff}}} \tag{15}$$

$$\frac{dCa\_{\text{er}}}{dt} = -\frac{1}{\sigma\lambda} \left[ \left( \frac{P\_{\text{leak}}}{P\_{\text{ip3}}} + O\_{\text{o}} \right) (Ca\_{\text{er}} - Ca\_{\text{i}}) - \frac{J\_{\text{eq,p}}}{P\_{\text{ip3}}} \right]. \tag{16}$$

Effective volumes are defined as V,eff = Vl/f and Ver,eff = Ve/fer, Several parameters have been combined into the time scale parameter, A = Vjefp/Pjp3, and the effective volume ratio, a = Vereft/ Vi,eff.

0cc = a.b.h.0 is the fraction of open IP3-activated Ca2" channels, where a. = Cai/(Cai + 0.1), b. = IP3J(IP3 + 0.2), and hcc = 0.4I(Cai + 0.4). SERCA pump flux is expressed as <sup>a</sup> Hill function, Jerpip3 = Verp Ca2I(Ca2 + 0.092), where Ver,p = 0.24 ,uM.

Other parameter values used in the calcium handling equations are: <sup>A</sup> = <sup>250</sup> ms, Plea/Pip3 = 0.02, fi = 0.01, a/V1 = 3.6 X 10-6 fA-1 ,uM ms-1, kca/V1 = 0.07 ms-1, or = 5, and Vi,eff = 7.19 X <sup>106</sup> ,um3. For more details on the ER calcium handling model, see Li and Rinzel (1994).

Ionic current infinity functions have the form zcc = 1/(1 + exp[(vz - V)Isz]): vmf= -20, smf = 7.5, vms = -16, sms = 10, vj = -53, sj = -2, vn = -15, sn = <sup>6</sup> (mV). The CRAC current activation function is r. = 1/(1 + exp[Caer - 3]). Time constants are Tn= 4.86/(1 + exp[(V + 15)/6]) and Tj = (5 X 104)/(exp[(V + 53)/4] + exp[-(V + 53)/4]) + 1.5 X <sup>103</sup> (ms).

We assume <sup>a</sup> cell radius of <sup>7</sup> gm, so Cm = <sup>6158</sup> fF. Maximum ionic current conductances are gCaf = 810, gc( = 510, gK = 3900, =K(Ca) 1200, gcRAc =75 (pS). Reversal potentials are Vc. = 100, VK = -70, VCRAC = <sup>0</sup> (mV). Values for the parameters gK(ATP), kcJV1, and iP3 are given in figure legends.

We thank lain Dukes for sharing early unpublished data on Tg and ICRAC' and for suggesting that the ER plays <sup>a</sup> role in the biphasic response to glucose. R. B., P. S., and A. S. performed numerical simulations. D. M. and I. A. performed Tg experiments. F. M. and B. S. performed carbamylcholine experiments. The ideas are the common property of all. F. M. and B. S. were supported in part by Fondo de Investigacion Sanitaria de la Seguridad Social, DGICYT and Commission for the European Communities.

## REFERENCES

- Ammala, C., K. Bokvist, 0. Larsson, P.-O. Berggren, and P. Rorsman. 1993. Demonstration of <sup>a</sup> novel apamin-insensitive calcium-activated K' channel in mouse pancreatic <sup>3</sup> cells. Pflugers Arch. 422:443-448.
- Ammdla, C., 0. Larsson, P.-O. Berggren, K. Bokvist, L. Juntti-Berggren, H. Kindmark, and P. Rorsman. 1991. Inositol trisphosphate-dependent periodic activation of <sup>a</sup> Ca2+-activated K' conductance in glucosestimulated pancreatic 3-cells. Nature 353:849-852.
- Ashcroft, F., and P. Rorsman. 1989. Electrophysiology of the pancreatic 3-cell. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 54:87-143.
- Atwater, I., B. Ribalet and E. Rojas. 1978. Cyclic changes in potential and resistance of the B-cell membrane induced by glucose in islets of Langerhans from mouse. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 278:117-139.
- Bahnson, T. D., S. J. Pandol, and V. E. Dionne. 1993. Cyclic GMP modulates depletion-activated Ca2' entry in pancreatic acinar cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268:10808-10812.
- Beigelman, P. M., B. Ribalet, and I. Atwater. 1977. Electrical activity of mouse pancreatic 13-cells: II. Effects of glucose and arginine. J. Physiol. (Paris). 73:201-217.
- Berridge, M. J., and R. F. Irvine. 1989. Inositol phosphates and cell signalling. Nature. 341:197-205.
- Bertram, R., P. Smolen, and A. Sherman. 1994. A model for muscarinic modulation of insulin secretion via a calcium release activated current (CRAC). Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 20:727.
- Bozem, M., M. Nenquin, and J. C. Henquin. 1987. The ionic, electrical, and secretory effects of protein kinase C activation in mouse pancreatic Bcells: studies with a phorbol ester. Endocrinology. 121:1025-1033.
- Chay, T. R., and D. L. Cook. 1988. Endogenous bursting patterns in excitable cells. Math. Biosci. 90:139-153.
- Cook, D. L. 1984. Electrical pacemaker mechanisms of pancreatic islet cells. Fed. Proc. 43:2368-2372.
- Cook, D. L., W. E. Crill, and D. Porte Jr. 1981. Glucose and acetylcholine have different effects on the plateau pacemaker of pancreatic islet cells. Diabetes. 30:558-561.
- Cook, D. L., M. Ikeuchi, and W. Y. Fujimoto. 1984. Lowering of pH, inhibits Ca2+-activated K' channels in pancreatic (B-cells. Nature. 311:269-271.
- Gilon, P., R. M. Shepherd, and J. C. Henquin. 1993. Oscillations of secretion driven by oscillations of cytoplasmic Ca2' as evidenced in single pancreatic islets. J. Biol. Chem. 268:22265-22268.
- Grodsky, G. M. 1972. A threshold distribution hypothesis for packet storage of insulin and its mathematical modeling. J. Clin. Invest. 51:2047-2059.
- Grodsky, G. M., L. L. Bennett, D. Smith, and K. Nemechek. 1967. The effect of tolbutamide and glucose on the timed release of insulin from the isolated perfused pancreas. In Tolbutamide after Ten Years, W. J. H. Butterfield and W. Westering, editors. Excerpta Medica Foundation, Amsterdam. 11-21.
- Grynkiewicz, G., M. Poenie, and R. Tsien. 1985. A new generation of Ca21 indicators with greatly improved fluorescence properties. J. Biol. Chem. 260:3440-3450.
- Henquin, J. C. 1992. Adenosine triphosphate-sensitive K' channels may not be the sole regulators of glucose-induced electrical activity in pancreatic B-cells. Endocrinology. 131:127-131.
- Henquin, J. C., M. C. Garcia, M. Bozem, M. P. Herman, and M. Nenquin. 1988. Muscarinic control of pancreatic B cell function involves sodiumdependent depolarization and calcium influx. Endocrinology. 122:2134- 2142.
- Hoth, M., and R. Penner. 1992. Depletion of intracellular calcium stores activates a calcium current in mast cells. Nature. 355:353-356.
- Jones, P. M., J. Stutchfield, and S. L. Howell. 1985. Effects of Ca2' and <sup>a</sup> phorbol ester on insulin secretion from islets of Langerhans permeabilized by high-voltage discharge. FEBS Lett. 191:102-106.
- Keizer, J., and G. De Young. 1993. Effect of voltage-gated plasma membrane Ca2+ fluxes on IP3-linked Ca2+ oscillations. Cell Calcium. 14:397-410.
- Kukuljan, M., A. A. Goncalves, and I. Atwater. 1991. Charybdotoxinsensitive K(Ca) channel is not involved in glucose-induced electrical activity in pancreatic 3-cells. J. Membr. Biol. 119:187-195.
- Leech, C. A., G. G. Holz IV, and J. F. Habener. 1994. Voltage-independent calcium channels mediate slow oscillations of cytosolic calcium that are glucose dependent in pancreatic 3-cells. Endocrinology. 135:365-372.
- Lernmark, A. 1974. The preparation of, and studies on, free cell suspensions from mouse pancreatic islets. Diabetologia. 10:431-438.
- Li, Y.-X., and J. Rinzel. 1994. Equations for InsP3 receptor-mediated [Ca21] oscillations derived from a detailed kinetic model: a Hodgkin-Huxley like formalism. J. Theor. Biol. 166:461-473.
- Meissner, H. P., and I. Atwater. 1976. The kinetics of electrical activity of (3-cells in response to a square wave stimulation with glucose or glibenclamide. Horm. Metab. Res. 8:11-16.
- Mertz, L. M., B. J. Baum, and I. S. Ambudkar. 1990. Refill status of the agonist-sensitive Ca21 pool regulates Mn21 influx in parotid acini. J. Biol. Chem. 265:15010-15014.
- Nadal, A., M. Valdeolmillos, and B. Soria. 1994. Metabolic regulation of intracellular calcium concentration in mouse pancreatic islets of Langerhans. Am. J. Physiol. 267:E769-E774.
- Parekh, A. B., H. Terlau, and W. Stuhmer. 1993. Depletion of InsP3 stores activates <sup>a</sup> Ca2' and K+ current by means of <sup>a</sup> phosphatase and <sup>a</sup> diffusible messenger. Nature. 364:814-818.
- Putney, J. W. 1990. Capacitative calcium entry revisited. Cell Calcium. 11:611-624.
- Randriamampita, C., and R. Y. Tsien. 1993. Emptying of intracellular Ca2" stores releases a novel small messenger that stimulates Ca2+ influx. Nature. 364:809-814.
- Roe, M. W., M. E. Lancaster, R. J. Mertz, J. F. Worley III, and I. D. Dukes. 1993. Voltage-dependent intracellular calcium release from mouse islets stimulated by glucose. J. Biol. Chem. 268:9953-9956.
- Rojas, E., P. B. Carroll, C. Ricordi, A. C. Boschero, S. S. Stojilkovic, and I. Atwater. 1994. Control of cytosolic free calcium in cultured human pancreatic P3-cells occurs by external calcium-dependent and independent mechanisms. Endocrinology. 134:1771-1781.
- Sdnchez-Andrds, J., C. Ripoll, and B. Soria. 1988. Evidence that muscarinic potentiation of insulin release is initiated by an early transient calcium entry. FEBS Lett. 231:143-147.
- Santos, R. M., and E. Rojas. 1989. Muscarinic receptor modulation of glucose-induced electrical activity in mouse pancreatic B-cells. FEBS Lett. 249:411-417.
- Santos, R. M., L. M. Rosario, A. Nadal, J. Garcia-Sancho, B. Soria, and M. Valdeolmillos. 1991. Widespread synchronous [Ca21]i oscillations due to bursting electrical activity in single pancreatic islets. Pfldgers Arch. 418: 417-422.
- Satin, L. S., and D. L. Cook. 1988. Evidence for two calcium currents in insulin-secreting cells. PflUgers Arch. 411:401-409.
- Satin, L. S., and P. Smolen. 1994. Electrical bursting in (3-cells of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. Endocrine. 2:677-687.
- Silva, A. M., L. M. Rosirio, and R. M. Santos. 1994. Background Ca2+ influx mediated by a dihydropyridine- and voltage-insensitive channel in pancreatic (3-cells. J. Biol. Chem. 269:17095-17103.
- Smolen, P., and J. Keizer. 1992. Slow voltage inactivation of Ca21 currents and bursting mechanisms for the mouse pancreatic (B-cell. J. Membr. Biol. 127:9-19.
- Takemura, H., A. R. Hughes, 0. Thastrup, and J. W. Putney Jr. 1989. Activation of calcium entry by the tumor promoter thapsigargin in parotid acinar cells. J. Biol. Chem. 264:12266-12271.
- Valdeomillos, M., R. M. Santos, D. Contreras, B. Soria, and L. M. Rosario. 1989. Glucose-induced oscillations of intracellular Ca21 concentration resembling bursting electrical activity in single mouse islets of Langerhans. FEBS Lett. 259:19-23.
- Woods, S. C., and D. Porte Jr. 1974. Neural control of the endocrine pancreas. Physiol. Rev. 54:596-619.
- Worley III, J. F., M. S. McIntyre, B. Spencer, R. J. Mertz, M. W. Roe, and I. D. Dukes. 1994. Endoplasmic reticulum calcium store regulates membrane potential in mouse islet (3-cells. J. Biol. Chem. 269:14359-14362.
- Zweifach, A., and R. S. Lewis. 1993. Mitogen-regulated Ca21 current of T lymphocytes is activated by depletion of intracellular Ca21 stores. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 90:6295-6299.